WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER
15TH, TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ELECTRONIC MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION, THIS MEETING IS
BEING HELD ELECTRONICALLY BUT
WE INTEND TO CONDUCT THIS
MEETING SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING PUBLIC
COMMENT WILL BE VIA TELEPHONE
OR ZOOME ONLY TO SPEAK DURING
ANY THE PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE CALL TWO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND
INTERMEETING ID NINE THREE FOUR
SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE
ZERO SEVEN OR JOIN THE ZOOM
LANGUAGES ON THE AGENDA.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE POLICY AGENDA
AND IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST AND THE
BROADCAST OF THIS MEETING IS ON
CHANNEL 16.
SO BEFORE WE CALL ROLL I WOULD
LOVE TO INTRODUCE OUR NEWEST
COMMISSION MEMBER RAVINA
RAMASWAMY.
RAVINA RECENTLY SERVED ON THE
PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION AND
HAS A WEALTH OF KNOWLEDGE ON
MOBILITY ISSUES.
WE'RE EXCITED TO WELCOME HER TO
THE COMMISSION IS PRIVY TO HEAR
I DON'T SEE THAT SHE IS YET AND
IT WASN'T I KNOW WE SHE JUST
RECENTLY CONFIRMED YEAH.
SO SHE IS TECHNICALLY ON THE
COMMISSION AND I WOULD LIKE TO
WELCOME HER REGARDLESS.
>> YEAH.
SO WE'RE EXCITED TO HAVE HER IF
SHE JOINS WE'LL CHECK BACK
MAYBE BUT I THINK WE CAN
PROBABLY PROCEED WITH CALLING
ROLE.
>> CHRIS, THANK YOU.
OK, NOW RECEIVE REGRET'S FROM
COMMISSIONER HAUTAMKI
MARGOLESE AND HUTCHINSON WHO
WILL NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND
PLEASE STAY HERE AND FROM WHERE
YOU'RE DINING WHEN YOUR NAME IS
CALLED COUNCIL MEMBER ECKMANN
OK COMMISSIONER HERE IN ANN
ARBOR COMMISSIONER BOVON HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
THERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER IF THAT WERE
COMMISSIONER CLAMAN I.
I JUST PROMOTED COMMISSIONER
KLIMENT AS A PANELIST.
>> I SEE THAT YOU'RE HERE AND
HEAR FROM ANN ARBOR.
>> OK, COMMISSIONER LEE THERE
FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER CARPENTER HERE
FROM SUPERIOR TOWNSHIP
COMMISSIONER RAMASWAMY.
YEAH, OK.
COMMISSIONER HESS, YOU'RE FROM
ANN ARBOR AND LIEUTENANT MIKE
SCHERBA, YOU'RE FROM TORONTO.
>> ARE YOU OK WITH THAT?
>> WE HAVE KHORRAM SO PRIVETT I
SAW THAT YOU JOINED A LITTLE
LATE.
JUST WANTED TO SORT
OF OFFICIALLY WELCOME YOU TO
THE COMMISSION.
WE'RE VERY HAPPY TO HAVE YOU.
UM, IF YOU'D LIKE TO SAY A FEW
WORDS ABOUT YOURSELF AND YOUR
INTEREST IN SERVING ON THE
COMMISSIONER.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME TO THANK YOU
AND APOLOGIES FOR COMING LATE
PASS CODE IN AND I I'M VERY
HAPPY TO BE PART OF THIS
COMMISSION.
THIS IS MY SECOND COMMISSION
ROUND.
I WAS IN THE FIRST COMMISSION
FOR TWO POINT FIVE TERMS WHICH
IS ALMOST A LITTLE OVER NINE
YEARS.
SO I MISS MY COMMISSION LIFE
AND I'M HAPPY TO BE PART
OF THIS.
MY HISTORY HAS BEEN IN THE
TRANSPORTATION INDUSTRY WITH
TOYOTA FOR A FEW MANY YEARS AND
THEN I WENT TO MOBILITY AND
AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES AND NOW I'M
AT PVCS WORKING ON
ELECTRIFICATION AND
OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
SO I HAVE A LONG HISTORY
OF TRANSPORTATION AND I LIVE ON
THE NORTH SIDE OF TOWN JUST BY
THE SEA ONE QUARTER FOR
PLYMOUTH ROAD.
SO THIS IS VERY DEAR TO MY
HEART.
THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
AND MOVEMENT IN OUR CITY AND
MOBILITY.
>> SO YEAH, WE'RE WE'RE VERY
EXCITED TO HAVE YOU
.
>> SO WE TEND TO FOLLOW
ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER A
LITTLE LOOSELY.
WE TEND TO ADDRESS EACH OTHER
BY FIRST NAME AND THEN AS A
REMINDER FOR DENHA IS ONE
OF OUR TWO VACANCIES ON THE
COMMISSION.
SO IF YOU'RE AWARE OF ANYBODY
WHO MIGHT BE INTERESTED IN
SERVING, THEY'LL FEEL FREE TO
LET THEM KNOW AND APPLY IT.
BUT WE'RE VERY HAPPY TO HAVE
YOU PREVIA.
THANK YOU.
UM, SO I THINK WE CAN MOVE
FORWARD NOW THERE ARE TWO ITEMS
ON THE CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA AND APPROVAL
OF THE MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA?
YEAH, UM I WANTED SOME
CLARIFICATION ON THE WORK PLAN
SETTING AGENDA ITEM MAYBE
AGREEMENT.
BUT AFTER THAT IS THAT MEANT TO
BE AN INTRODUCTION TO THAT
TOPIC AND THEN WE'LL TALK MORE
ABOUT IT IN DECEMBER OR YEAH,
THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
TODAY I WAS JUST GONNA SOLICIT
SOME FEEDBACK AND THEN COME
BACK TO YOU WITH A DRAFT IN
DECEMBER.
SO WE JUST START INTRODUCING
THE ITEM TONIGHT AND PROBABLY
DISCUSS OVER ONE OR TWO
MEETINGS.
>> OK, THAT CASE I HAVE NO
COMMENT OR OBJECTION TO THE
PERCENTAGE EITHER COMMENTS IS
THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
CONSENT AGENDA AS PRESENTED?
SO, UH, MOTION MADE BY PETE AND
SECONDED BY JULIE ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF THE MOTION PLEASE SAY
YES.
>> YES, YES.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED SAY NO WRITE
THE CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED
.
SO NOW WE MOVE ON TO PUBLIC
COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AN INTERMEETING
ID NINE THREE FOUR SIX THREE
EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN
OR CONNECT VIA ZOOM AS
DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA CITY
STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS THAT
HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE BY
ONE BY USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR
THE PERSON ZOOMED IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RAISED
HAND BUTTON AND ZOOM.
YOU SHOULD HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET
AREA AND MUTE ANY TELEVISION OR
BACKGROUND SOUND SO THAT WE CAN
HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS.
CHRIS, DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WISH TO SPEAK
DURING PUBLIC COMMENT AT THIS
TIME WE DO NOT
.
OH RIGHT.
>> SO IN ADDITION TO MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WE'VE ALSO GOT
COMMENTS THAT HAVE BEEN
ATTACHED TO THE AGENDA OR IN
REGISTAR.
SO THERE ARE 11 EMAILS
INCLUSIVE OF ATTACHMENTS
INCLUDED IN THE PACKET.
SO I ENCOURAGE EVERYONE TO TAKE
A LOOK AT THOSE IF YOU HAVEN'T
ALREADY.
SO IT IS THAT TIME OF YEAR WE
HAVE AFTA SET OUR MEETING
SCHEDULE FOR CALENDAR YEAR
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
THERE IS A DRAFT SCHEDULE FOR
OUR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL
AND RAYMOND AND CHRIS TO REVIEW
NOT A PROBLEM.
>> GO AHEAD AND SHARE MY SCREEN
RIGHT NOW
OK I HOPE YOU GUYS
CAN SEE THAT.
>> I KNOW THAT YEAH IT'S JUST
VERY BIG.
>> YEAH OK YEAH IT'S BETTER OK
SO DON'T AS RAYMOND MENTIONED
EARLIER THE ONLY DAY THAT WE
HAVE SOME CONFLICT AS THE
NINETEENTH STATE WHICH WAS ON
JUNE 19TH WAS WHAT I DID IS I
WENT AHEAD AND PREPARED SOME
OPTIONS FOR YOU GUYS.
SO RIGHT OFF THE BAT ALL OF THE
FRIDAYS ARE AVAILABLE BUT I I
WOULD STRONGLY RECOMMEND TO USE
THE SLOT THAT HAS BEEN THAT IS
NO LONGER USED BY THE COUNCIL
OF COMMONS WHICH IS ON THE
FIRST THURSDAY OF OF THE MONTH
AT 7:00 PM FOR THAT MONTH
OF JUNE.
BUT YEAH THE AS WELL SOME
OF SOME OF THE OTHER SLOTS THAT
ARE AVAILABLE ARE THE LAST
TUESDAY OF THE MONTH LAST
WEDNESDAY AND THURSDAY AND AND
THE IF YOU GUYS CHOOSE THOSE
DATES IT WOULD HAVE TO BE
BETWEEN THE HOURS TO TWO FROM
TWO TO THREE P.M. THREE P.M.
BEING THE LATEST THE MEETING
COULD POSSIBLY START.
AND JUST FOR SOME ADDITIONAL
CONTEXT, WE ARE PROPOSING TO
KEEP THE REGULAR TIME SLOT FOR
ALL THE REMAINING MEETINGS
WHICH WOULD BE THE THIRD
WEDNESDAY OF THE MONTH AT 7:00
P.M. FOR MONDAY OR THROUGH
JANUARY ALL THE WAY THROUGH
DECEMBER EXCEPT FOR AS AS CHRIS
MENTIONED, JUNE IS A CONFLICT.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS IF YOU ALL
COULD CHECK YOUR CALENDARS IF
YOU HAVE ACCESS TO THAT TO SEE
IF JEUNES SIX WHICH IS WHAT
THAT FIRST THURSDAY IS AT 7:00
PM IF THAT WOULD WORK FOR YOU
THIS IS WHY IT'S IMPORTANT FOR
US TO PICK THIS THIS CALENDAR
TODAY IN THIS DATE TODAY'S WE
HAVE TO UPLOAD ALL OF NEXT
YEAR'S APPOINTMENTS BY EARLY
DECEMBER SO THAT IT CAN BE
PROGRAMED AND LEGISLATURES THAT
CAN CAN PROGRAM THE RECORDING
SO FORTH AND SO ON.
SO THIS IS SOMETHING WE WOULD
LIKE ACTION ON TONIGHT.
SO AND AGAIN WHILE CHRIS IS
SUGGESTING THURSDAY, JUNE SIX
WERE AVAILABLE FOR ANY OF THEM
SO IF THE COMMISSION AS A WHOLE
HAS A PREFERENCE FOR ANY
OF THOSE OTHER AND OF GREEN
WINDOWS THAT ARE IDENTIFIED,
WE'RE HAPPY TO TAKE THOSE OFF
AS WELL
.
LET'S SEE IF I CAN SEE IF
ANYBODY HAS INCREASED AND UM SO
FOR MY PART I LIKE THE IDEA
OF KEEPING THE THURSDAY AT
SEVEN JUST BECAUSE THAT'S KIND
OF WHAT WE'RE USED TO.
JUST A DIFFERENT WEEK.
SORRY.
GO AHEAD.
I THINK THIS IS MY FIRST
MEETING BUT I WAS GOING TO SAY
WE KEEP SEVEN DURING THE DAY IS
DIFFICULT FOR WITH WORK.
>> YEAH THAT'S KIND OF HOW I
FEEL TO ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR
CONCERNS
.
>> SO I THINK I MEAN I THINK
WE'RE PROBABLY GOOD TO DO THE
SEVEN PM ON JUNE SIX.
YES IT'LL BE JUNE SIX.
>> RIGHT.
AND YOU JUST BRING UP THE FULL
LIST AGAIN REAL QUICK IF THAT I
THINK YEAH I THINK IT SOUNDS
LIKE THAT TIME IS GOOD.
NO ONE'S OBJECTING YOU.
YEAH NO I'M JUST I'M JUST
DOUBLE CHECKING AGAINST JEWISH
HOLIDAYS MUSLIM HOLIDAY IT
LOOKS LIKE WE'RE OK.
WELL SUCO CONFLICTS WITH THE
SIXTEEN BUT I DON'T THINK
THAT'S PROBABLY I DON'T THINK
ANYONE WOULD OBJECT ON THAT ONE
.
>> IS THAT OCTOBER 16TH?
YEAH
OCTOBER ANY OTHER COMMENTS
IF IF SO I THINK WE CAN MOVE TO
TO THE PROBABLY UM IS THERE A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR MEETING SCHEDULE AS
DISCUSSED AND WITH THAT
MODIFICATION OF THE THE JUNE
MEETING BECAUSE I SAW JULIE AND
THEN SECONDED BY ONE TO ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR.
YES.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED.
RIGHT.
THANKS EVERYBODY.
UM TO MANY MORE OF THESE UM SO
ARE WE READY TO MOVE ON?
I THINK SO.
UM EVERY YEAR WE DEVELOP A
TENTATIVE LIST OF TOPICS.
SO THIS IS THE THE WORKPLAN HE
WAS REFERENCING EARLIER EVERY
YEAR WE DEVELOP TENTATIVE LIST
OF TOPICS THAT WE HOPE TO
COVER .
STAFF IS INTRODUCING THIS ITEM
TONIGHT TO GET SOME INITIAL
IDEAS AND THEN WE'LL TALK MORE
ABOUT IT IN DECEMBER AS THERE'S
LIKE FEEDBACK AND SUCH AND I
AND THEN AT THAT POINT WE'LL
VOTE ON IT.
>> SO RAYMOND, DID YOU WANT TO
SAY MORE ON THIS?
YEAH, IF I COULD JUST WHAT I'VE
DONE IS SO INCLUDED IN YOUR
HOMEWORK WAS A LINK TO LAST
YEAR'S PLAN AND I'M SURE YOU IF
YOU HAD A CHANCE TO LOOK AT
OVER I'M SURE YOU SAW A LOT
OF THINGS SHIFT AROUND FOR
EXAMPLE LIKE OUR SCHEDULE THAT
WE HAD INITIALLY ANTICIPATED
FOR TRAFFIC CALMING.
WE ACTUALLY WERE AHEAD
OF SCHEDULE.
WE APPROVED A LOT OF THOSE
TRAFFIC CONDITIONS WELL IN
ADVANCE OF WHAT WE HAD
INITIALLY THEM SO THIS IS MEANT
TO SAY THAT THIS IS A LIVING
DOCUMENT.
>> BUT WHAT WE LIKE TO DO IS
REACH OUT TO STAKEHOLDERS AND
PARTNER AGENCIES TO SEE IF THEY
HAVE ITEMS THAT THEY'D LIKE TO
SHARE.
AND THEN WE ALSO WANT TO HEAR
FROM YOU IN TERMS OF WHAT ITEMS
YOU WOULD LIKE FOR US TO
PREPARE TO BRING TO YOU.
>> SO I THIS AFTERNOON I WENT
THROUGH I TOOK THE THIS CURRENT
YEAR CALENDAR AND I STARTED TO
BUILD OUT NEXT YEAR JUST TO
GIVE YOU AN IDEA OF SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT POPPED INTO MY
BRAIN.
SOME OF THESE ARE RECURRING IN
THAT WE ALWAYS HAVE AN ELECTION
UP CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR IN
JANUARY FOR EXAMPLE AND SOME
OTHER THINGS.
SO I'LL JUST QUICKLY HIGHLIGHT
THOSE AND THEN I'LL OPEN THE
FLOOR TO SEE IF THERE ARE ANY
OTHER SUGGESTIONS AND AND THIS
IS ONE OF THOSE THINGS THAT WE
CAN LEAVE IT OPEN THROUGH
PERHAPS THE END OF THE MONTH
AND PEOPLE CAN FREE THOSE TO
MYSELF.
CHRIS, MEGHAN AND BRETT AND
THEN WE CAN COME BACK WITH A
MORE FORMALIZED ONE.
SO IN JANUARY
WE'RE LOOKING AT
THE ANNUAL REPORTS WHICH BY THE
WAY WE ARE LOOKING FOR A GUEST
COLUMN.
YOU MAY RECALL THAT THERE'S
ALWAYS A PASSAGE THAT'S WRITTEN
BY THE CHAIR AND THEN WE ALSO
HAVE ANOTHER COMMISSION MEMBER
THAT RITES OF PASSAGE.
SO I'M LOOKING FOR SOME
VOLUNTEERS THAT THEN WE HAVE
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR ELECTIONS
IN JANUARY.
WE HAVE A POLICY AGENDA INPUT
SO AS A REMINDER THIS IS
DIRECTION TO CITY COUNCIL ABOUT
LOCAL, STATE AND NATIONAL
DIRECTIVES OR POLICY THAT THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WOULD
LIKE TO SEE CITY COUNCIL TAKE
ON.
WE MAY HAVE TRAFFIC CALMING FOR
THE BIRD.
I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S STREET OR
HAVE MAYBE AS EARLY AS JANUARY
THAT MAY BE FEBRUARY DEPENDING
UPON HOW SOME PUBLIC MEETINGS
SCHEDULED FOR THAT AND ALSO
THINKING OF BRINGING SAFE
STREETS FOR ALL BACK TO YOU AT
SOME POINT GIVE YOU AN UPDATE
ON HOW THAT'S GOING AND THEN
THE TRUNK LINE TRANSFER STUDY
WE PENCILED IN FOR JANUARY AS
WELL MOVING ON TO FEBRUARY, THE
NEXT TRAFFIC COMPETITION THAT
WE'RE CURRENTLY WORKING ON IS
TORELLO AND THEN WE TYPICALLY
BRING TO THE TWENTY TWENTY
FOURTH STREET RESURFACING AND
RELATED PROJECTS AND THEN MAYBE
ADD UP TO AN OVERVIEW OF THE
QUICK BUILD 2.0 WHICH IS TAKING
ALL OF OUR BULFORD BIKE LANES
AND PUTTING IN PROTECTION WAS
LOOKING AT MARCH TRAFFIC
COMING.
THE NEXT ONE IS HENRY STREET SO
JUST AND MARCHING THROUGH THOSE
SO WE HAVE RIGHT NOW FOR MARCH
BUT I'M SURE OTHER THINGS WILL
FILL IN IN APRIL.
WE TEND TO GET A BUDGET
PRESENTATION FROM THE CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER SO I SUSPECT
THAT WOULD HAPPEN AT A TIME
LAST YEAR WE GOT AN UPDATE FROM
GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM IN APRIL
AS WELL.
SO I'LL REACH OUT TO THE
DOWNTOWN TO SEE IF THEY'RE
INTERESTED IN COMING BACK AND
GIVE ME AN UPDATE LAST YEAR IN
THIS CURRENT YEAR I GUESS I
SHOULD SAY WE HAVE AN UPDATE
FROM UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH
INSTITUTE IN MAY.
WE CAN ASK THEM IF THEY WANT TO
COME BACK AS WELL.
THEN IN JUNE I JUST PENCILED IN
THE ANNUAL REVIEW OF BYELAWS
WHICH SHOULD OCCUR THE BYLAWS
AND REVIEW SO AND IT'S HERE IN
JULY AS WELL.
THAT'S A TYPE OF JULYS WHEN WE
GET AN UPDATE ON THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN AND THAT'S
WHEN THAT PROCESS KIND OF KICKS
OFF AND THERE'S OPPORTUNITY TO
GET SOME INITIAL INPUT FROM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND
LATE SUMMER IN AUGUST WE START
OF DISCUSSIONS ABOUT THE ANNUAL
CRASH REPORT THAT'S ASSUMING
THAT THE DATA IS AVAILABLE.
WE'VE HAD A CHANCE TO ANALYZE
IT BY AUGUST BUT SOMETIMES
WE'RE DISCUSSING TONIGHT SO
SOMETIMES SLIPS TO OCTOBER .
THEY'RE I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING
PENCILED IN RIGHT NOW FOR
SEPTEMBER OCTOBER BUT AGAIN
THAT DOESN'T MEAN WE WOULD NEED
LOTS OF STUFF TO DISCUSS THIS
YEAR UNFOLDS THEN TOWARDS THE
END OF THE YEAR WE HAVE SOME
OF OUR RECURRING KIND OF TASKS
LIKE SETTING A READING DATE
LIKE WE JUST AND THEN WE START
TO WORK ON WORK PLAN IN
DECEMBER BUT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT TONIGHT AND THEN START TO
WORK ON THE POLICY AGENDA AS
WELL.
DECEMBER.
>> SO THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT AGAIN THIS IS JUST
A VERY QUICK DRAFT.
THIS IS NOT FULLY BUILT OUT.
I'M NOT YET REACHED OUT TO
OTHER AGENCIES LIKE THE DDA OR
THE RIDE TO SEE SPECIAL TOPICS
THEY MIGHT WANT TO DISCUSS.
BUT YOU I COME BACK WITH A MORE
BUILD OUT WORK PLAN BY NEXT
MONTH BUT HAPPY TO TAKE ANY
SUGGESTIONS OR RECOMMENDATIONS
ON TOPIC AREAS THAT YOU ALL
WOULD LIKE TO SEE.
JULIE, PLEASE GO AHEAD.
YEAH, I THINK IT'S BEEN SORT
OF A BACK KIND OF A PLAN THAT
HASN'T MATERIALIZED FOR AT
LEAST A YEAR OR SO TO GET A
REPORT ABOUT THE SCHOOLS AND
TRANSPORTATION KIDS TO AND FROM
SCHOOL FROM COMMISSIONER
CROWLEYS OR HER REPRESENTATIVE
.
>> THEY'LL BE GREAT IF WE CAN
GET THAT ON THE
GO AHEAD.
>> SO SORRY I MESSED THAT UP.
YEAH.
I MEAN SECONDED ON THAT IN
TERMS OF AGENDA ITEMS FROM THE
RIDE, I WOULD LOVE TO HEAR
ABOUT SIGNAL PRIORITY AND
EVENTUALLY BUS BUS LANE BUS
RAPID TRANSIT KINDS OF THINGS.
I KNOW THEY WERE IN THE LONG
RANGE PLAN AND I'M EAGER TO
HEAR ABOUT TIMELINE AND
PROGRESS FOR THOSE THINGS.
>> IT'S FUNNY YOU MENTION THAT.
OH YEAH.
I'D LIKE RAYMOND IF POSSIBLE TO
PUT AN ITEM ON THE WORK PLAN
WITH THE COMMISSION'S SUPPORT
TO DISCUSS TRANSIT PRIORITY
MEASURES IN BUS LANES.
>> YEAH, SOUNDS AWESOME.
>> YEAH YEAH
.
OH I HAD ANOTHER ONE.
WHAT WAS IT.
OH RIGHT COUNCIL APPROVAL
OF PARKING REMOVAL.
YEAH THAT'S A BIT YEAH.
ANYTHING ELSE AT THIS POINT I
WOULD DEFINITELY ENCOURAGE
PEOPLE TO SORT OF SLEEP THINK
ABOUT IT AND SEND AN EMAIL TO
ME BRETT RAYMOND ANY
COMBINATION THEREOF AND WE CAN
GET BACK TO THIS IN DECEMBER
AND IF I COULD GIVE A HARD
DEADLINE ON THAT IF YOU GET
SOME IN BY NOVEMBER 30TH THEN
WHAT I CAN DO BRETT AND I HAVE
A AGENDA SETTING MEETING ON
DECEMBER 1ST.
>> WE CAN KIND OF REVIEW ALL
THAT AND SEE WHERE WE CAN PLUG
IT INTO IN SPACE IT IN A WAY
WHERE THINGS AREN'T CLUSTERED
ALL AROUND ONE MEETING KIND
OF GIVE IT AT A CERTAIN CADENCE
WHERE WE CAN GET THROUGH THE
MATERIALS WE NEED TO GET
THROUGH.
BUT YEAH, PLEASE IF YOU IDEAS
COME TO MIND WE SEND THEM TO US
BY NOVEMBER 30TH AND I'LL SEE
HOW I CAN BAKERMAN THANKS
RAYMOND.
>> SO I THINK WE CAN MOVE TO
OUR FIRST FULL PRESENTATION
OF THE NIGHT.
SO WE'RE JOINED THIS EVENING BY
JADA HARDROCK AND
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE
CONSULTING TEAM WHO WORKED ON
THE CURBSIDE MANAGEMENT STUDY.
JADA AND THE TEAM WILL REVIEW
THE FINDINGS OF THE REPORT AND
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS WE MAY
HAVE.
YEAH, THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
THANK YOU.
MY NAME IS DAVID HALL AND THE
PARKING MANAGER AT THE ANN
ARBOR GVA AND TODAY I'M JOINED
BY MY COLLEAGUE AMBER MILLER
AND KRISTINE INSIGNE NICKOLS
AND JIM CORBETT FROM WALKER
CONSULTANTS.
SO WE ATTENDED ONE OF YOUR
MEETINGS LAST SUMMER AS OUR
STUDY WAS GETTING UNDERWAY AND
WE REALLY APPRECIATE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO COME AND SPEAK
TO YOU AGAIN.
I WANT TO LEAVE PLENTY OF TIME
FOR THE PRESENTATION BUT I
THOUGHT I WOULD BRIEFLY SHARE
JUST A FEW PIECES OF HIGH LEVEL
INFORMATION THAT I THINK MIGHT
BE HELPFUL AS YOU LEARN ABOUT
THE STUDY AND FINDINGS AND I
HOPE IT HELPS TO CLARIFY ROLES
AND RESPONSIBILITIES ESPECIALLY
AROUND ACTIVITY AT THE KERBAL.
ARE YOU ABLE TO SHARE?
NOT YET.
CAN I HAVE SCREEN SHARE?
THANK YOU.
YEAH CHRIS YOU'LL HAVE TO
CHRISSY BECAUSE I CAN AND YOU
SHOULD HAVE OK GOT
THANK YOU.
SO THE DENHA MANAGES OPERATES
AND MAINTAINS THE DOWNTOWN
PUBLIC PARKING SYSTEM THROUGH
AN AGREEMENT WITH THE CITY.
DENHA HAS A CONTRACT WITH PCI
MUNICIPAL SERVICES FOR DAY TO
DAY OPERATION OF THAT SYSTEM.
WE MANAGE THE PARKING SYSTEM IN
SUPPORT OF DENHA AND CITY GOALS
AND VALUES AND OVERALL DOWNTOWN
VITALITY.
THE PARKING SYSTEM IS A
SELF-SUSTAINING SYSTEM AND SOME
OF THOSE PARKING REVENUES ARE
USED TO SUPPORT OTHER
TRANSPORTATION RELATED
INITIATIVES NAMELY THE PARKING
REVENUE FUNDS THE GO PASS FOR
DOWNTOWN EMPLOYEES.
THE CITY RECEIVES TWENTY
PERCENT OF GROSS PUBLIC GROSS
PARKING REVENUE FOR THE GENERAL
FUND AND THE CITY MANAGES AND
RECEIVES REVENUE FROM
ENFORCEMENT AND RESIDENTIAL
PERMIT PROGRAM.
SO AGAIN I HOPE THAT JUST KIND
OF HELPS TO CLARIFY ROLES.
LISTEN TO OUR STUDY AND OUR
FINDINGS.
>> TURN IT OVER TO CHRISSY.
THANKS DENHA SO THANKS EVERYONE
FOR HAVING US TODAY.
I'M PRETTY MUTED WITH MY CAR
CONSULTANTS AND WHEN I TALK
THROUGH THIS STUDY AND SOME
OF OUR FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS.
>> SO FIRST OF ALL I'M THINKING
ABOUT JUST THE OF THE PANDEMIC
HAS ISSUED REINFORCE THIS VALUE
OF CURB SPACE WHICH I'M SURE
EVERYONE HERE UNDERSTANDS VERY
WELL.
YOU KNOW, USING THE SPACE TO
INCREASE ACCESS, UNDERSTANDING
THAT IT'S SOME OF THE MOST
VALUABLE PIECE OF REAL ESTATE
IN DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR.
IT'S NOT SIMPLY A PIECE
OF CONCRETE WHEN WE THINK ABOUT
BEST PRACTICES, WHAT WE FOUND,
WHAT ONE GREAT THING WE FOUND
AS PART OF THE STUDY IS THAT
WHAT YOU'RE DOING RIGHT NOW
WHEN IT COMES TO CRIME
MANAGEMENT BEST PRACTICES
PRIORITIZING CURB SPACE FOR
BIKING, PEDESTRIAN SPACE,
OUTDOOR DINING, INCENTIVIZING
BEHAVIOR THROUGH PRICING WE
DIGITIZED THE RIGHT REGULATIONS
.
>> ALL OF THE THINGS THAT
YOU'RE DOING NOW ARE REALLY
BEST PRACTICES.
SO WE'RE CHECKING A LOT
OF BOXES ALREADY AND YOU'LL SEE
IN OUR RECOMMENDATIONS A LOT
OF IT IS CONTINUE TO DO THIS
BECAUSE YOU'RE ALREADY DOING IT
AND IT'S JUST GREAT TO WORK
WITH A CITY IN THE DENHA WHERE
WE'RE NOT HAVING
TO REALLY PUSH
FOR A LOT OF THESE
RECOMMENDATIONS BECAUSE THEY'RE
ALREADY HAPPENING AND YOU
ALREADY UNDERSTAND THE NEED AND
THAT'S HOW WE GET TO ALL OF THE
THINGS THAT CURBS CAN DO TO
ADVANCE GOALS FOR CLIMATE FOR
THE TRANSPORT COMPANIES, THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN FOR PEOPLE
FRIENDLY STREETS.
THAT'S WHAT OUR ULTIMATE GOAL
IS HERE WITH THE STUDY.
>> SO WANT TO UNDERSTAND FIRST
THE CURB DATA USE AND THAT'S
WHERE WE COLLECTED DATA IN
THREE LOCATIONS IN TOWN ON
LIBERTY STREET AND THE SOUTH
UNIVERSITY AREA WE USE CAMERA
DATA COLLECTION.
WE COLLECTED DATA FOR A WEEK
FROM SIX A.M. TO ONE A.M. TO
ONE A.M. AND WE COLLECTED
BASICALLY ANY CURB SESSION THAT
OCCURRED IN THESE LOCATIONS.
WE SAW IT AND RECORDED IT SO
MILLIONS OF DATA POINTS AND OUR
OVERALL FINDINGS IS THAT THAT
PARKING METERS ARE WHEN THE
METERS ARE HIGHLY UTILIZED
DURING TIMES WHERE THERE IS NO
ENFORCEMENT OCCURRING.
>> SO THAT'S CHALLENGING
BECAUSE YOU'RE NOT ABLE TO
MANAGE THOSE PEAK TIMES.
MOST KIRP SESSIONS ARE LESS
THAN FIFTEEN MINUTES ACTUALLY
MANY ARE LESS THAN EVEN FIVE
MINUTES.
SO THAT'S DIFFICULT TO ENFORCE
AND WE SEE THAT CHALLENGE
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
THE SHORT TERM PARKERS ARE
PARKING ANYWHERE THEY'RE
PARKING IN NO PARKING ZONES,
CROSSWALKS ANYWHERE THEY CAN
FIND A SPACE BECAUSE THEY'RE
THINKING WELL IT'S SHORT TERM
WE CAN GET IN AND OUT QUICKLY
AND AVOID A CITATION.
BUT THERE ARE A SIGNIFICANT
AMOUNT OF CURB VIOLATIONS.
SO ON THIS SIDE YOU SEE IN THE
SOUTH UNIVERSITY STUDY AREA
ABOUT SEVENTEEN PERCENT OF ALL
THE CURB SESSIONS OCCURRING
WERE VIOLATIONS.
SO THIS IS PARKING IN FRONT
OF A DRIVEWAY IN A NO PARKING
ON A BIKE.
WELL A CROSSWALK AND THE MEDIAN
DURATION OF THOSE VIOLATIONS
WAS FOUR MINUTES.
SO AGAIN, HARD TO ENFORCE BUT
THIS YOU KNOW, THIS IS ABOUT
CURB VIOLATIONS A DAY AND THIS
DOES NOT INCLUDE THE METER
CITATION.
THAT'S AN IMPORTANT PART.
THIS IS JUST WHAT WE'RE SEEING
IN THE CAMERA DATA AND THEN
THERE IS A GAP WE LOOKED AT THE
METER TRANSACTIONS.
THERE'S A GAP BETWEEN THE METER
PAYMENT IN THE ACTUAL USE.
SO THAT'S A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
FOR PEOPLE WHO AREN'T PAYING
AND WHY THIS ALL MATTERS IN
THESE VIOLATIONS ARE PREVENTING
ACCESS TO LOCAL BUSINESSES.
THEY'RE CREATING SAFETY
CONFLICTS PREVENTS THE SYSTEM
TO OPERATE IN A FINANCIALLY
SOUND WAY AND YOU HAVE
REGULATIONS IN PLACE FOR A
REASON AND PEOPLE AREN'T PAYING
ATTENTION TO THEM.
AND YOU KNOW, IN TERMS OF THE
DATA WHAT IT MEANS FOR
TYPOLOGIES, WE'RE ORGANIZING
DOWNTOWN INTO TYPOLOGIES DENSE
DENSE RETAIL RESIDENTIAL AREAS
SUCH AS MANGED AROUND THE
UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOOD
TYPOLOGIES A NEIGHBORHOOD
COMMERCIAL TOPOLOGY IN
KOREATOWN AND THEN OUTSIDE
OF THE DENSE AREA IN THE SINGLE
FAMILY AND DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL
AREAS IN TERMS OF DENSE AREAS
THERE'S DEFINITELY A NEED FOR
MORE SHORT TERM SPACES MOVING
LONG TERM PARTNERS TO THOSE
GARAGES WHERE THERE'S
AVAILABILITY INCREASING METER
RATES AND EXPANDING METER TIME
SO THAT WE CAN MANAGE THOSE
PEAKS AND THEN JUST THINKING
GENERALLY ABOUT REMOVING
PARKING DENSE AREAS.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND
THE NUANCE BECAUSE WE WANT TO
MAKE SURE WE HAVE ACCESS FOR
EVERYONE THAT NEEDS ACCESS
WHETHER THAT'S IN ADA SPACE OR
COMMERCIAL DELIVERY OR SHORT
TERM PARKING FOR BUSINESSES IF
WE WANT TO IF WE WANT TO REMOVE
PARKING FOR BIKE AND BUS LANES,
WE WANT TO THINK ABOUT THE
SPILLOVER EFFECTS ON ADJACENT
STREETS WHERE WE CAN MOVE OUT
PARKING TO AND STUDYING THAT
AND WE'LL SHOW YOU AN EXAMPLE
OF WHAT YOU'RE DOING NOW THAT
WORKS AND THEN SAME THING WITH
IN NEIGHBORHOODS LIKE GARY TOWN
OBVIOUSLY THE NEW ONES THERE
WITH THE FARMER'S MARKET DAYS
THERE'S A LOT OF ACTIVITY, A
LOT OF VEHICLES TRYING TO GET
IN AND OUT AND THEN JUST
OUTSIDE OF DENSE AREAS
UNDERSTANDING THE SPILLOVER
EFFECTS THEIR FUTURE
DEVELOPMENT.
>> SO WHAT IF JUST WALK THROUGH
THE DATA?
SO IN KOREATOWN IN LIBERTY
STREET YOU CAN SEE HERE MOST
OF THE TRANSACTIONS OR MOST
OF THE SESSIONS ARE UNDER
FIFTEEN MINUTES, MANY UNDER TWO
MINUTES VERY SHORT SESSIONS YOU
SEE THESE PEAKS ARE STUDY
THROUGHOUT THE DAY.
HERE'S WHERE WE'RE LOOKING AT
THIS GREEN LINE IS PARKING
METER TRANSACTION DATA FOR THE
SAME DATA STUDY PERIOD.
SO THE GREEN LINE IS PARKING
METER TRANSACTIONS.
THE BLUE LINE ARE LEGITIMATE
CURB USAGE SO PEOPLE THAT ARE
PARKED AT THE CURBSIDE IN ZONES
REGULATED FOR PARKING OR
COMMERCIAL LOADING AND THEN THE
ORANGE LINE SHOWS THAT GAP
OF VIOLATIONS.
SO YOU SEE THERE'S A GAP
BETWEEN PEOPLE PARKING
LEGITIMATELY AND PAYING AND
THEN THIS WHOLE OTHER GROUP
OF PEOPLE THAT ARE JUST
VIOLATING REGULATIONS AND THEN
YOU SEE IN THE CIRCLE THE TIMES
THAT METERS AREN'T ENFORCED.
THERE'S STILL A PRETTY SIZABLE
OCCUPANCY RATE AT THAT TIME
AFTER SIX SAME THING IN THE
SAME UNIVERSITY AREA WE'RE
SEEING EVEN MORE UNDER TWO
MINUTE SESSIONS AND UNDER
FIFTEEN MINUTE SESSIONS.
THERE'S JUST A LOT OF ACTIVITY
THERE.
YOU KNOW, I STOOD OUT IN THE
FOREST FOR A DAY AND YOU JUST
SAW PEOPLE GOING IN AND OUT A
COUPLE OF THAI RESTAURANTS.
THERE'S A JUICE SHOP, THE
7-ELEVEN JUST YOU KNOW,
CONSTANT TURNOVER AND THAT'S
WHY YOU SEE THIS CONTINUOUS
OCCUPANT OF DEMAND THAT'S
STEADILY INCREASING THROUGHOUT
THE DAY.
AND AGAIN, EVEN A MORE DRASTIC
PEAK HERE AFTER THE METERS ARE
TURNED OFF AT 6:00 P.M. THERE'S
STILL A LOT OF DEMAND FOR SPACE
AND EVEN A LARGER GAP BETWEEN
PARKING METER TRANSACTION.
SO PEOPLE ACTUALLY PAYING THE
METER PEOPLE PARKING AND THEN
THIS OTHER GAP BETWEEN PEOPLE
PARKING IN AREAS THAT ARE
REGULATED FOR PARKING AND AREAS
THAT ARE SHOULD NOT PEOPLE
SHOULD NOT BE PARKING.
YOU KNOW, LIKE I DISCUSSED
EARLIER, THE AVERAGE CURB
VIOLATIONS DE IN THIS STUDY
AREA WAS ONLY FOR A MINUTE.
SO VERY CHALLENGING TO ENFORCE
THAT MANUALLY.
HERE'S HOW THIS LOOKS ON THE
MAP SO YOU CAN SEE HERE ON WEST
LIBERTY SO THIS IS ONE HUNDRED
BLOCK OF WEST LIBERTY.
THERE'S A COFFEE SHOP, THERE'S
A STARBUCKS AT THE CORNER.
YOU CAN SEE BOTH ONE SIDE THE
STREETS REGULATED FOR TWO HOUR
PARKING.
ONE SIDE'S REGULAR FOR NO
PARKING AND THEY FUNCTION
ESSENTIALLY IN THE SAME MANNER.
YOU JUST HAVE A LOT OF THESE
VERY QUICK TRIPS TO PICK UP
COFFEE ESSENTIALLY.
BUT THAT'S YOU CAN SEE THE
ACTIVITY THERE WHERE THAT NO
PARKING IS ESSENTIALLY
OPERATING AS PARKING.
YOU KNOW, SAME THING IN
KOREATOWN.
THERE'S A NO PARKING STRETCH
OF THE BLOCK ON FIVE HUNDRED
BLOCK OF NORTH FIFTH THAT'S
OPERATING AS PARKING.
BUT YOU DO SEE THIS FIFTEEN
MINUTE CURB HAS BEEN THIS CURB
HAS REGULATED FIFTEEN MINUTES
AND THERE'S JUST A LOT
OF ACTIVITY THERE SHORT TERM
STAYS SO THAT'S WHAT WE WANT TO
SEE IS DO WE JUST KEEP THE
STREET PARKING FOR THESE THESE
SHORT TERM STAYS AND THEN GET
PEOPLE OFF TO THE STREET LOTS
IF THEY'RE GOING TO BE PARKING
FOR LONGER PERIODS OF TIME AND
THIS IS THE TWELVE HUNDRED
BLOCK UNIVERSITY, YOU KNOW,
FUNCTIONING THE SAME WAY
THERE'S A DRIVEWAY THERE'S A NO
PARKING AREA.
THE PEOPLE ARE PARKING IN.
BUT ONE THING TO HIGHLIGHT ON
THIS SLIDE IS THERE'S THERE
WERE FIFTEEN HUNDRED CURB
SESSIONS THAT WE SAW DURING
THIS TIME.
THERE'S JUST THE CURB IS REALLY
PROVIDING A LOT OF ACCESS AND A
LOT OF FUNCTIONS SO YOU KNOW,
REALLY IT'S THERE TO SUPPORT
BUSINESSES AND THERE'S TO
SUPPORT ACCESS.
IT'S DOING ITS JOB.
WE JUST NEED TO FIGURE OUT A
BETTER MECHANISM TO REGULATE
AND ENFORCE THESE AREAS.
SO HERE ARE SOME OF OUR
RECOMMENDATIONS.
YOU KNOW, LOOKING AT UPDATING
RATES, HAVING MORE SHORT TERM
PARKING SPACES, YOU KNOW,
COMING UP WITH THE LOADING ZONE
STANDARD WE SAW THAT RIGHT NOW
THE ISSUE WITH LOADING ZONES
ISN'T NECESSARILY THAT THERE
AREN'T ENOUGH ZONES IS THAT
PEOPLE THAT AREN'T CONDUCTING
COMMERCIAL DELIVERY ARE PARKING
IN THOSE LOADING ZONES.
SO WE WANT TO GET THOSE FOLKS
OUT OF THE LOADING ZONE SO
THOSE COULD BE RESERVED FOR
BUSINESSES THAT ARE ACTUALLY
CONDUCTING LOADING YOU KNOW,
MODERNIZING THE ENFORCEMENT
STRATEGY.
THIS IS NOT UNIQUE TO ANN ARBOR
.
WE ARE WORKING WITH CITIES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY WHERE IT'S
JUST CHALLENGING TO ENFORCE
THESE SUPER SHORT TERM DAYS.
WE'RE SEEING IT IN EVERY CITY
WITH THE STRATEGIES OF THE
OFFICERS WALKING AROUND.
YOU KNOW, YOU THINK ABOUT OUR
DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES HAVE
EVOLVED FROM WE USED TO JUST
WALK AROUND WITH CLIPBOARDS
EVERY HOUR AND LOOK AT
UTILIZATION.
WE IN DOING SO WE MISSED A TON
OF CURB ACTIVITY.
SO NOW WE USE CAMERAS AND
SENSORS AND COMPUTER VISION TO
COLLECT THAT DATA AND NO
ENFORCEMENT PRACTICES ARE THE
SAME WAY WE NEED TO MODERNIZE
THEM AND WE'RE ALSO DEVELOPING
A DATA COLLECTION PROCESS.
WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE IN TERMS
OF THE DATA THAT IS IN PLACE
THAT WE CAN USE TO CONTINUOUSLY
MONITOR SPACES AND REFINE CURB
TREATMENTS, STUDY THEM AND MAKE
ADJUSTMENTS AND THEN COMING UP
WITH PERFORMANCE METRICS
TYPOLOGIES WHICH I MENTIONED
UPDATING ENFORCEMENT HOURS AND
THEN LONG
TERM THINKING ABOUT
CURB USES AND PAID COMMERCIAL
DELIVERY ZONES OF ALL USES
OF THE CURB PAYING FOR THAT
SPACE BEYOND JUST PARKERS AND
THEN CURB DIGITIZATION.
WHAT WE DID THROUGH THE STUDY
IS WE DIGITIZED ALL THE
REGULATION SO THOSE ARE
ACTUALLY IN A DIGITAL PLATFORM
AND THEY'LL BE TRANSLATED INTO
THIS NEW CURB DATA
SPECIFICATION API AND AT SOME
POINT IN THE NEXT FEW YEARS
CURBS WE'LL TALK TO EACH OTHER
SO YOU HAVE TO BE ABLE TO TALK
TO FEDEX AND THEY CAN PLAN
DELIVERIES AROUND THOSE
REGULATIONS.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE ARE PLANNING
FOR THROUGH THE STUDY.
AND THEN WE JUST LASTLY WANTED
TO TIE IN WHAT THIS MEANS FOR
EXAMPLE WITH THE WILLIAM STREET
BIKEWAY, YOU KNOW, THE WILLIAM
STREET BIKEWAY, THE DATA SHOWS
THAT IT'S THERE'S A CYCLISTS
USING IT.
BUT WHAT CONTRIBUTED TO THAT
SUCCESS WAS THERE WAS A
THOUGHTFUL PROCESS ABOUT
REMOVING PARKING WHERE THE
SPILLOVER WOULD OCCUR, KEEPING
PARKING ON ONE SIDE OF THE
STREET SO THAT THERE'S STILL
THAT ACCESS TO BUSINESSES AND
IT'S NOT EITHER OR AND THEN
JUST TAKING AN ITERATIVE
APPROACH STUDYING USED
UNDERSTANDING THAT ORIGINALLY
THERE WERE PEOPLE JUST PARKING
THE BIKE LANE SO MOVING FROM
THE DELINEATOR TO CONCRETE
CURBS TO PREVENT THAT AND JUST
THIS STUDY TESTING STUDY WHAT
WE WANT TO SEE AND THAT'S
DEFINITELY A BEST PRACTICE THAT
WAS CONNECTED WITH THE WAY
STREET BIKEWAY SO SO WITH THAT
WE CAN OPEN UP TO DISCUSSION OR
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS YOU MIGHT
HAVE
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS AT
THIS POINT.
OK, FOR ME TO GO FOR YOUR
PRESENTATION IN THE LOADING
ZONES IS ARE THOSE PEOPLE THING
IS YOUR DATA SHOWING THAT
PEOPLE ARE STAYING AS AS IT TO
BE PARKING?
ARE THEY THERE FOR FIVE MINUTES
TO GO GRAB SOMETHING?
IS THAT DO WE KNOW HOW LONG
THEY'RE STAYING SPOTS?
FOR THE MOST PART THEY'RE
THEY'RE JUST GRABBING SOME YOU
KNOW, PICKING UP FOOD,
SOMETHING REALLY QUICK.
THE AVERAGE DAYS THEY'RE LIKE
UNDER FIVE MINUTES WE ARE ONLY
ABOUT SEVEN PERCENT OF ALL THE
CURB USES.
>> WE'RE ACTUALLY DELIVERY
TRUCKS LIKE TRUCKS OR VEHICLES
THAT YOU WOULD THINK ARE
DELIVERING.
>> SO YOU HAVE PEOPLE THAT ARE
PARKING IN THOSE ZONES OR JUST
RUNNING IN TO GET A JUICE OR
SOMETHING LIKE THANKS SO MUCH.
THIS WAS REALLY INTERESTING.
THIS IS MAYBE MORE A QUESTION
FOR FOR CITY STAFF BUT I'M SORT
OF CURIOUS ABOUT WHAT LIKE WHAT
THE PLAN IS TO DO NEXT WITH
THIS AND I'M THINKING
PARTICULARLY OF CONVERSATIONS
THAT STARTED WITH LINDA DIANE
SO MANY YEARS AGO NOW IN WHICH
SHE WAS REALLY INTERESTED IN
EXPANDING THE NUMBER
OF ACCESSIBLE STREET SPOTS
AROUND DOWNTOWN AND YOU KNOW,
ONE THING THAT THAT WAS REALLY
OBVIOUS IN THE STUDY IS THAT
REALLY SO MANY OF THESE SHORT
THESE LIKE SO MUCH OF THE
SERVICE IS VERY SHORT AND I'M
WONDERING ABOUT WAYS TO REALLY
PRIORITIZE ACCESSIBLE LONGER
TERM ACCESSIBLE SPOTS, ALTHOUGH
IT'S POSSIBLE THAT EVEN FOR THE
ACCESSIBLE SPOTS WE DON'T NEED
THEM TO BE THAT LONG TERM AND
LOADING ZONES AS BEING SORT
OF THE TO THOSE ARE THE THINGS
THAT THE PAIN POINTS THAT WE
HAVE BEEN HEARING ON THE
COMMISSION FOR YEARS AND IT
SEEMS AS THOUGH THIS STUDY
WOULD SUPPORT AN APPROACH WHERE
WE ARE PRIORITIZING THOSE TWO
THINGS AND I'M JUST SORT
OF CURIOUS WHAT THIS MEANS
GOING FORWARD
AMERICAN I PHONE
A FRIEND OR DENHA ON THAT ONE
CAN I CAN I CAN GET STARTED MY
COLLEAGUE CAN CHIME IN THIS
NEEDED SUB.
YES.
CERTAINLY THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
WE WERE THINKING ABOUT AS PART
OF THE STUDY AND CHRISTIE
HELPED US TO UNDERSTAND SOME
NEW OR I GUESS THE FIRST TIME
REGULATION COMING FROM THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ABOUT THE
SPACES ON STREET WHEN YOUR
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED STREETS BUT
CERTAINLY IN ADVANCE OF THAT
WILL BE USING THE INFORMATION
FROM THE STUDY THIS WINTER TO
KIND OF COMPREHENSIVELY LOOK AT
ALL OF THE AVIESON SPACES
DOWNTOWN NOT JUST QUANTITY BUT
QUALITY WHERE THEY ARE ON THE
BOXES, WHERE THEY ARE IN
PROXIMITY TO JUSTIN AND SO ON.
SO THAT WILL BE ONE OF THE
ITEMS THAT WE WILL GET STARTED
ON RIGHT AWAY AND CERTAINLY
ADDING MORE YOU KNOW, THE
INFORMATION JUST SHOWS THAT
NOBODY'S USING THE TRADITIONAL
FOUR HOUR SPACES LIKE THEY USED
TO SO MOVING THOSE PEOPLE
ELSEWHERE AND MAINTAINING THAT
CURRENT SPACE FOR OTHER USERS
AND MAYBE THEY CAN ADD A LITTLE
BIT MORE TO THE SPOT MOLLY THAN
TO USE CURBSIDE USES THAT YOU
CALLED OUT A.D.A AND LOADING
THOSE ARE THE SAME PRIORITIES
THAT WE'VE HEARD FROM CHRISSY
AND THE TEAM.
SO AS REMOVING PARKING AND
REPURPOSING HOW WE'RE USING OUR
STREETS THOSE ARE THE PRIORITY
USES THAT HAVE TO BE
ACCOMMODATED AND GREAT.
THANK YOU.
YEAH I MEAN THE OTHER THING IS
THAT I THINK WE COULD PROBABLY
HAVE LESS STREET PARKING JUST
IN GENERAL BUT THAT SORT OF I
REALIZE THAT WE HAVEN'T GOTTEN
THERE YET.
RIGHT NOW WE'RE JUST DEALING
WITH THE AND PETE, THANKS FOR
THE PRESENTATION.
I I GUESS I'M A LITTLE CONFUSED
ABOUT WHAT WELL WE TALKED ABOUT
IN THE PRESENTATION THAT THERE
ARE A LOT OF VERY SHORT
DURATION TRIPS OR SHORT
DURATION OF PARKING AND THEN
ALSO IT SEEMS LIKE THERE'S A
DESIRE TO COME TO MAKE SURE
THAT PEOPLE ARE PAYING FOR
PARKING.
AND I GUESS I'M JUST WONDERING
LIKE WHAT DOES WHAT DOES PAYING
FOR A VERY SHORT DURATION TRIP
LOOK LIKE?
>> WHAT DOES THAT LOOK HOW DOES
THAT LOOK WHEN WE HAVE THE FOUR
MINUTE TRIP AND WE'RE TRYING TO
TO TURN THAT INTO A PARKING
TRANSACTION?
I THINK IT WOULD TAKE ME FOUR
MINUTES TO PAY FOR PARKING.
>> THAT'S FOR YEAH.
BUT YOU KNOW, THERE WE DON'T
PARKING THERE'S A COST TO
MANAGE AND MAINTAIN ALL OF THIS
INFRASTRUCTURE SO WE DON'T WANT
TO JUST SAY YOU DON'T HAVE TO
PAY FOR PARKING SHORT TERM.
YOU KNOW, IN FACT WE WANT TO
THINK ABOUT CHARGING ALL USERS
OF THE CURB.
SO YOU KNOW, RIGHT NOW THERE'S
AN APP THAT'S PRETTY YOU CAN
PAY PRETTY QUICKLY AND EASILY
AND IT CAN BE CALIBRATED FOR 15
MINUTES.
SO CAN METERS.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE DATA
MOST PEOPLE ARE USING THE APP
TO PAY FOR PARKING SO PEOPLE
CAN QUICKLY JUST HIT PAY AND
FOR THE MOST PART PAY FOR THEIR
PARKING.
I DID SEE SOME PEOPLE PAYING
FOR FIFTEEN MINUTES GOING TO
THE METER AND PAYING BUT YEAH
IT IS LIKE GETTING PEOPLE IN
THE MINDSET THAT IF YOU'RE
PARKING EVEN IF IT'S FOR A
SHORT TERM YOU HAVE TO PAY FOR
IT AND ENFORCING IT.
I AM OK WITH THAT CONCEPT.
I AGREE WITH IT I GUESS I JUST
DON'T WANT TO TURN FIVE MINUTE
TRIPS INTO TEN MINUTE TRIPS BUT
YOU KNOW ADDING AN EXTRA STEP
IF I MEAN IT JUST FEELS LIKE WE
NEED A SOLUTION TO THAT.
I'M NOT IN THAT AREA PUSHING
AGAINST THE IDEA OF IT THAT WE
JUST NEED A WAY TO PREVENT THAT
FROM HAPPENING.
>> YEAH.
SO LOOK THIS IS VERY LONG TERM.
WE'RE WORKING FOR EXAMPLE WITH
OMAHAW TO DO SMART COMMERCIAL
LOADING ZONES WHERE WE'RE USING
LICENSED BLADE AND CAMERAS TO
ASSESS FEES ON DELIVERY DRIVERS
TO PARK IN FIFTEEN MINUTES
SEGMENTS SO THEY DON'T HAVE TO
DO ANYTHING.
THE CAMERA JUST PICKS IT UP,
YOU KNOW IT'S OH IT'S IN THE
PILOT PHASE RIGHT NOW.
SO WE'RE STUDYING THAT WE'RE
STUDYING THE ACCURACY OF THE
CAMERAS, HOW PEOPLE WILL
RESPOND AND EVEN FREIGHT
COMPANIES AT THIS POINT WILL
RESPOND TO THAT.
SO THE TECHNOLOGY IS EVOLVING.
IT'S NOT THERE YET.
WE WOULDN'T WANT TO DEPLOY IT
IN A SETTING LIKE DOWNTOWN
RIGHT NOW.
BUT OVER TIME HAVING THAT
DIGITAL REGULATION WILL SET UP
IN OUR SHOULD YOU WANT MOVE TO
SOMETHING LIKE DIGITAL PAYMENT
SYSTEM.
THANK YOU.
>> I SEE LARRY HAS HIS HAND UP
LARRY.
YES, I HEARD YOUR REPORT WAS
GOOD LAST TIME AND AND COMPANY
AND IS GOOD THIS TIME TOO BUT
DON'T FORGET THAT OUR
COMMISSION WAS ASKING YOU TO
LOOK INTO UTILIZATION OF AN
EQUALIZATION OF HANDICAPPED
PARKING SPACES AND MAYBE
LOOKING INTO THE TAKEN CARE
OF THAT AND ALSO WHAT OCCURRED
TO ME IS A DROP OFF FOR LIKE
AWIDE AND SOMETIMES THEY TAKE A
MINUTE OR TWO SO MAYBE I'LL
LOOK INTO THAT TOO AND SEE HOW
HOW THAT INTERACTS WITH
EVERYTHING.
SO JUST SO YOU DON'T FORGET THE
PARKING SPACES THAT WE TALKED
ABOUT EARLIER THAT WOULD BE
VERY NICE TO ADDRESS.
>> YEAH, DEFINITELY.
WE'VE ALREADY WE'VE ALREADY
STARTED THAT PROCESS FOR DENHA
.
YEAH.
SORRY I HAVE ANOTHER QUESTION.
GO AHEAD.
UM I'M STILL STUCK ON MY
LOADING ZONES SO I'M I'M KIND
OF UNDER TRYING TO MY MIND IS
WONDERING DOES THE LOADING ZONE
IS THAT UNDERSTOOD BY BY THIS
NEW GENERATION?
IS THAT UH JUST A TRUCK IN THE
PAST BUT MAYBE IS THAT NOW
CONSIDERED A DELIVERY VEHICLE
THAT'S PICKING UP OR DROPPING
OFF FOOD?
ROUBIDEAUX IS IT SOMEONE JUST
DOING A CURBSIDE?
IS IT UNDERSTOOD AND HAD
TODAY'S WORLD BUT THAT MEANS
AND THEN THE SECOND PART AND
THIS IS MAYBE A COMMERCIAL
VEHICLE BACKGROUND IS WHAT I'VE
BEEN READING A LOT ABOUT IS NOW
THAT WE HAVE BIKE LANES AND THE
ROADS HAVE BECOME SMALLER,
WHERE DO IS THERE ENOUGH SPACE
FOR THESE LARGE COMMERCIAL
VEHICLES TO PULL IN TO DO THEIR
DROP OFFS OF IN IN THE PAST IT
USED TO MOSTLY BE TO BUSINESSES
BUT NOW WE SEE MORE RESIDENTS
IN THESE AREAS.
BUT THERE'S APARTMENT BUILDINGS
.
IS THERE ENOUGH SPACE FOR A
LARGE CLASS TWO TO FIVE FEDEX
TRUCK COMING IN TO DROP OFF AN
AMAZON PACKAGE TO MANY HOUSES
WHICH IS BECOMING MORE AND MORE
OF A TREND WITH INSTA CART AND
FOOD DELIVERY?
>> AND IS THE CITY REALLY
THINKING ABOUT IN THIS PLAN
PREPARING THOSE PLACES WERE
THIS CHANGING ENVIRONMENT OF OF
DELIVERY?
>> YEAH.
SO FOR YOUR FIRST QUESTION, DO
YOU PEOPLE DO DIFFERENT
GENERATIONS SEE LOADING ZONES
THAT JUST FOR TRUCKS SO THERE
IS ALREADY THERE ARE SOME
SPECIES THAT ARE REGULATED FOR
COMMERCIAL LOADING BUT THERE'S
ALSO SPACES THAT ARE REGULATED
FOR SHORT TERM OR YOU KNOW,
FIFTEEN MINUTE LOADING FOR
ANYONE.
SO THAT'S WHERE WE'RE LOOKING.
DO WE HAVE MORE OF THOSE SHORT
TERM SPACES TO ACCOMMODATE THE
SHUBERT'S DRIVER OR EVEN A
PERSON THAT'S JUST DRIVING TO
PICK UP THEIR FOOD?
I MEAN IDEALLY SOME OF THOSE
TRIPS OF PEOPLE DRIVING OVER TO
LAKE MAYBE COULD WALK.
YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT
THE DISTANCES IT MIGHT BE
EASIER TO WALK.
BUT YOU KNOW, IF THEY ARE GOING
TO DRIVE THEN THAT'S PART
OF THE STUDY IS CREATING JUST
MORE SHORT TERM SPACES ON
STREET AND GETTING RID OF SOME
OF THOSE LONG TERM SPACES
UNLESS IT'S FOR ADA AND THEN
THE SECOND SO YOUR SECOND
QUESTION ABOUT JUST SPACE FOR
LARGER VEHICLES.
SO WE ARE THROUGH THE STREET
DESIGN ANNUAL UPDATE LOOKING AT
YOU KNOW, WHERE THERE ARE DENSE
RESIDENTIAL OR RETAIL AREAS
MAKING SURE THERE'S ADEQUATE
SPACE FOR COMMERCIAL LOADING
AND I BELIEVE THAT THAT'S
ALREADY PART OF THE PROCESS IN
THROUGH THE COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW WE'RE ALSO
LOOKING AT THINGS LIKE HUBS AND
LOCKERS WHERE YOU A TRUCK COULD
JUST PULL OFF STREET TO A
LOCKER HUB AND WE'RE WORKING ON
THESE AND OTHER CITIES AND IT
JUST MAKES IT A LOT EASIER THEN
THEY'RE NOT EVEN ON THE STREET.
THEY'RE JUST DELIVERING TO ONE
LOCATION AND HAVE TO KEEP
CIRCLING TO LOOK FOR PARKING
AND JUST TO ADD TO THAT WITH
EACH OF OUR PROJECTS WE ARE
CREATING AND RELOCATING PRETTY
SIGNIFICANTLY SIZED LIVING
CELLS.
SO THE SPACE EXISTS.
WHAT WE'RE FINDING IS WITHOUT
PHYSICAL BARRIERS OR
ENFORCEMENT DRIVERS WILL
CONTINUE TO TO USE THE SPACE
THAT EXISTED FOR SOME PARKING
IN THE BIKE WAY INSTEAD
OF MOVING TO THOSE NEARBY
ADEQUATE LOADING ZONE.
SO THEN WE'RE HAVING TO ADD
PHYSICAL BARRIERS IN ORDER TO
ENCOURAGE THAT CHANGE.
THE
I'M GLAD WE GOT BACK TO THE
TOPIC OF BIKE LANES.
I WAS GOING TO ASK WHICH WHICH
OF THE SHORT AND NEAR TERM
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT YOU HAVE
ARE, YOU KNOW, LIKELY TO HAVE
AN IMPACT ON GETTING PARKING
OUT OF THE BIKE LANE OR GETTING
PEOPLE WHO ARE PARKING GIVING
THAT SOME OTHER PLACE SO IT
WOULD BE NICE TO KNOW WHICH
OF THOSE ARE SPECIFICALLY AIMED
AT THAT IF ANY OF THEM ARE
WHICH ARE LIKELY TO BE THE MOST
HIGH IMPACT OR FIXING THAT
PARTICULAR PROBLEM.
>> YEAH, THAT'S DEFINITELY
DEVELOPING AND MODERNIZING THE
MODERNIZE ENFORCEMENT STRATEGY
AND WORKING WITH A CITY TO
DETERMINE WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE
,WHAT ARE THE GOALS FOR
ENFORCEMENT AND CONTINUOUSLY
COLLECTING DATA LIKE WE SHOWED
ON THE WILLIAM STREET PARKWAY,
YOU KNOW, UNDERSTANDING THAT
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO PARK IN
THAT BIKE LANE IF IT'S NOT IF
THERE'S NOT A CONCRETE OR
PERMANENT BARRIER.
SO COLLECTING DATA, READING THE
DATA, UNDERSTANDING THE
HOTSPOTS THAT MODERN
ENFORCEMENT STRATEGY WOULD BE A
BIG HURDLE TO OVERCOME AND IN
REGULATING SOME OF THESE AREAS
MAYBE I MISSED IT DURING THE
PRESENTATION BUT CAN YOU SAY
MORE ABOUT WHAT ARE THE
CRITICAL COMPONENTS OF A MODERN
ENFORCEMENT STRATEGY?
WELL, IT'S THINKING ABOUT LIKE
COLLECTING DATA, LOOKING AT
WHERE ARE THE HOTSPOTS AND
CREATING ROUNDS OR TO MAKE SURE
SO FOR EXAMPLE ON FOREST IS
THERE THERE'S A LOT OF ACTIVITY
THERE OR ON WHERE AND WHERE
THERE'S THE BIKE LANE OR IS
THERE CONSTANT ENFORCEMENT
PRESENCE ESPECIALLY DURING PEAK
TIMES OR AH OR WHEN THE BIKE
LANE GOES IN SO THAT PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND YOU'RE GOING TO GET
A TICKET IF YOU PARK HERE AND
OR DISOBEY THE REGULATION YOU
KNOW WE WANT TO HAVE THIS BE
ABOUT EDUCATION BUT PEOPLE ARE
CONTINUALLY VIOLATING THEN WE
WANT TO HAND OUT TICKETS WE'VE
ALSO DONE IN OTHER CITIES
MOBILITY SAFETY FINES.
WE IMPLEMENTED THEM IN BOULDER
SO IF YOU PARK IN A CROSSWALK
OR A BIKE LANE THE FINE IS FOUR
TIMES THE AMOUNT OF IF YOU JUST
DON'T YOU DON'T PAY THE METER
SO THAT HELPS PEOPLE RESPOND TO
ESPECIALLY SOME OF THOSE
CRITICAL AREAS THAT ARE
CREATING SAFETY VIOLATIONS.
BUT WE REALLY NEED TO WORK
WITH, YOU KNOW, THE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICERS TO DEVELOP THAT
STRATEGY AND UNDERSTAND THE
RESOURCES THEY HAVE AVAILABLE
TO DO THAT
.
>> YEAH, JUST WE'RE GOING TO
KEEP COMING BACK TO LOADING
ZONES AND THIS IS MORE OF A
COMMENT THAN A QUESTION.
BUT IN RESPONSE TO PREVIOUS
COMMENT, I THINK MY WHAT I
WOULD LIKE TO SEE IS FEWER BIG
TRUCKS COMING INTO THE CITY AND
YOU KNOW, PLAN THINKING ABOUT A
CURB MANAGEMENT PLAN THAT
INCLUDES IS EDGE OF THE CITY
HUBS AND OTHER WAYS TO
ENCOURAGE BIKE DELIVERIES AND
THERE ARE LOTS OF CITIES WHERE
THEY'VE BEEN ABLE TO BAN BIG
TRUCKS FROM THEIR CITY CENTERS.
I UNDERSTAND THAT WE'RE IN
MICHIGAN.
>> WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE
TO BAN ANYTHING BUT THOSE THOSE
VEHICLES ARE DISPROPORTIONATELY
DANGEROUS TO OTHER ROAD USERS
AND THEY ALSO TAKE UP AN
ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF SPACE AND I
WOULD RATHER NOT BUILD FOR THEM
IN OUR CITY CENTER.
>> SO THAT'S THAT'S WHAT I
WANTED TO SAY.
WE JUST FINISHED E CARGO BIKE
DELIVERY PLAN FOR SEATTLE AND
IT'S GOING TO BE IMPLEMENTED
WELL STARTING NEXT YEAR IT'S
GOING TO GO TO COUNCIL.
IT'S PART OF THE ZERO EMISSIONS
FREIGHT STRATEGY.
SO YOU DID JUST A LOT
OF OUTREACH WITH FREIGHT
OPERATORS AND BUSINESSES TO
UNDERSTAND THEIR NEEDS AND IT
WILL INCLUDE THOSE STRATEGY FOR
THE FREIGHT PARTNERS LIKE
AMAZON AND UPS TO DO A CARGO
BIKE DELIVERY BUT ALSO, YOU
KNOW, JUST BUSINESS.
A BUSINESS DELIVERY IS A
FLORISTS AND BAKERIES.
THAT'S A HUGE AMOUNT
OF DELIVERY ACTIVITIES
OCCURRING THAT A LOT OF THOSE
PACKAGES COULD BE DELIVERED IN
A CARGO BIKE.
>> YOU KNOW THE DELIVERY BIKES
KNOW THEY'RE WELL SUITED FOR
YOU FOR DELIVERY.
SO HOPING TO HAVE SOME
LEARNINGS FROM THOSE PILOTS.
AWESOME.
THANKS.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH,
EVERYBODY.
THIS WAS A GREAT DISCUSSION AND
YEAH, THIS IS JUST LIKE
INCREDIBLY VALUABLE SPACE IN
OUR CITY.
SO FIGURING OUT HOW TO BEST
MANAGE THAT AND JUST SERVE THE
PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE IS VERY
IMPORTANT.
>> SO RAYMOND, DID YOU WANT TO
DO A QUICK ANNOUNCEMENT?
YEAH, I DID WANT TO LET YOU ALL
KNOW CYNTHIA WAS TEXTING ME.
SHE SOMETHING CAME UP AND SHE
CAN'T ATTEND TONIGHT SHE SENDS
HER APOLOGIES AND REGRETS IT
SOMETHING UNFORESEEN CAME UP.
SO UNFORTUNATELY WE WON'T BE
ABLE TO TALK ABOUT THE CRASH
REPORT.
I COULD PRETEND I COULD DO IT
BUT I WOULD DO IT A DISSERVICE
TO HER AND I CHATTED ABOUT IT
EARLIER TODAY AND I THINK I
HAVE ENOUGH INFORMATION TO BE
DANGEROUS BUT I THINK IT WOULD
REALLY BENEFIT FROM HER
INVOLVEMENT.
SO ON THAT MATTER WHICH IS THE
LAST KIND OF SUBSTANTIVE ON
YOUR AGENDA?
I WOULD PROBABLY SUGGEST THAT
WE HOLD OFF ON THAT UNTIL
DECEMBER.
SO THE GOOD NEWS IS WE DO HAVE
A LITTLE BIT MORE TIME TO TALK
ABOUT YOU KNOW, WE'RE WRAPPING
UP THIS DISCUSSION OBVIOUSLY
WITHIN THE DOWNTOWN
CIRCULATION'S HAVE A LITTLE
MORE TIME OFF THAT.
SO MY APOLOGIES IF SOMETHING
UNFORESEEN SOMETIMES THESE
THINGS HAPPEN WE'LL JUST HAVE
TO ADJUST.
>> I THINK I WILL BE HAPPY TO
BE ABLE TO BE PRESENT FOR DO WE
NEED TO DO ANYTHING TO MODIFY
THE AGENDA OR ANYTHING LIKE
THAT?
>> CAN WE JUST IT'S JUST AN
INFORMATIONAL ITEM I'M NOT TOO
WORRIED ABOUT.
WE ACCEPTED THE AGENDA AT THE
FRONT OF IT.
WE REALLY, REALLY WANT TO BE
FORMAL FORMAL WE COULD BUT I
THINK WE'LL GET THAT ITEM.
YOU CAN JUST SAY WE'LL POSTPONE
IT TO THE NEXT MEETING
.
YEAH, I JUST GOT DONE TALKING
ABOUT HOW WE LOOSELY FOLLOWED
ROBERT'S OR SO I THINK WE'RE
WE'RE GOOD.
OK, SO ON TO THE NEXT ITEM AND
THANKS AGAIN FOR THE DISCUSSION
EVERYONE.
SO WE'RE JOINED THIS EVENING BY
RAYMOND AMBER MILLER AND
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE
CONSULTING TEAM WHO ARE WORKING
ON THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY.
THE TEAM WILL GIVE AN OVERVIEW
OF THE STUDY WHICH JUST BEGAN
AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS THAT
WE MAY HAVE.
SO I THINK THIS IS GOING TO GO
REALLY WELL WITH THE PREVIOUS
DISCUSSION.
SO RAYMOND WILL INTRODUCE THE
ITEM AND THEN TURN IT OVER TO
THE REST OF THE TEAM.
>> I JUST WANT TO TAKE A COUPLE
QUICK MOMENTS JUST KIND
OF FRAME WHAT THIS DISCUSSION
IS ALL ABOUT THERE BEING A LOT
OF REALLY GREAT PLANNING
INITIATIVES THAT HAVE COME OUT
BETWEEN OBVIOUSLY THE DENHA AND
THE PEOPLE FRIENDLY STREETS
INITIATIVE.
THEY WERE KIND OF UP FRONT WITH
A LOT OF THAT.
OBVIOUSLY YOU'RE SEEING THE
FRUITS OF A LOT OF THOSE LABORS
,THE CYCLE TRACKS AND A LOT
OF THE OTHER DOWNTOWN
IMPROVEMENTS.
THEN YOU HAD THE
CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN AND THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN KIND OF ON
THE HEELS OF THAT WHICH AGAIN
SET FORTH SOME PRETTY AMBITIOUS
VISIONS FOR HOW
THEIR
LONG-RANGE PLAN AS WELL THAT
IDENTIFIED FUTURE TRANSIT
IMPROVEMENTS.
>> AND SO YOU KNOW, WE WORK AS
A CITY VERY CLOSELY WITH THE
MEDIA HAPPY TO DO SO.
THEY'RE A GREAT PARTNER.
AND SO WHEN THE IDEA WAS MOVING
FORWARD WITH SOME IDEAS LOOKING
AT SOME OF THE DOWNTOWN
CIRCULATION, WE THOUGHT, YOU
KNOW, MAYBE THERE'S AN
OPPORTUNITY TO BROADEN IT AND
HELP ANSWER SOME OTHER
QUESTIONS IN OTHER AREAS AS
WELL.
AND SO AMBER AND I KIND PUT OUR
HEADS TOGETHER WITH OUR TEAM
AND AND CAME UP WITH WHAT WE
THOUGHT WAS A GOOD WAY TO HELP
ANSWER FOR LACK OF A BETTER
TERM WHAT ARE KIND OF THE
HIGHEST AND BEST USES ON
CERTAIN ROADS AND CORRIDORS
KNOWING THAT WE CAN'T FIT
EVERYTHING ON EVERY QUARTER
EVERYWHERE.
AND SO THIS STUDY IS JUST
KICKING OFF AND WE'RE REALLY
TRYING TO HELP KIND OF FRAME
SOME OF THESE IDEAS AND HOW
THEY'RE ALL INTERCONNECTED AND
HOW THEY FEED OFF OF ONE
ANOTHER, HOW THEY FEED INTO
DOWNTOWN AND OUTSIDE
OF DOWNTOWN.
AND SO THIS STUDY IS KIND OF AN
EXCITING INITIATIVE AND SO ON.
MY TEAM IS MYSELF AND TREVOR
ARE WORKING ON IT.
SO TRAVELERS DURING THIS TIME
YOU ALL HAVEN'T HAD A CHANCE TO
MEET TREVOR YET.
SO THIS IS YOUR FIRST
OPPORTUNITY TO MEET TREVOR IS
OUR OTHER TRANSPORTATION
PLANNER.
YOU MET SUZANNE FLOWERS A
COUPLE MEETINGS AGO AND THEN ON
AMBER ON HER TEAM SHE HAS
SEVERAL OF HER STAFF MEMBERS AS
WELL AS LORI AND OLIVER ARE
HERE AS WELL.
SO AMBER, LET ME GO AHEAD AND
TURN OVER YOU AND SAVE ME FROM
MY RAMBLING.
>> THANK YOU, EVERYBODY.
THANK YOU FOR MAKING TIME TO
TALK ABOUT MULTIPLE DENHA
INITIATIVES TONIGHT.
I'M AMBER MILLER, ADVOCACY
CAPITAL PROJECTS AND PLANNING
WITH THE DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY AND I WILL TURN TO I
BELIEVE ALL OF US PRESENTING
TONIGHT BUT ALL WE JUST WANT TO
INTRODUCE OURSELVES BRIEFLY.
>> SURE.
I'M OLIVER KYLY WITH SMITH
GROUP OUT OF OUR IN OUR OFFICE.
>> GOOD TO SEE MANY OF YOU
AGAIN EXCITED TO BE HERE TO
SHARE KIND OF WHAT WE'RE DOING
WITH THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY TODAY.
AND SO IN ADDITION TO SMITH
GROUP, WADE TREME IS ALSO ON
THE CONSULTING TEAM.
>> SO I'LL LET LAURIE SAY HELLO
.
HI EVERYBODY.
THANKS FOR HAVING ME HERE
TONIGHT.
MY NAME IS LAURIE PAWLICK AND
I'M A TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER
AT KATRN AND I'VE BEEN WORKING
WITH SMITH GROUP AND A TEAM ON
THE CIRCULATION STUDY.
>> RIGHT.
AMBER, DID YOU HAVE ANYTHING
ELSE YOU WANTED TO LEAD IN WITH
OR OTHERWISE I CAN SHARE MY
SCREEN AND JUMP INTO THINGS
THINGS LIKE OH I CAN HIT THE
BUTTON BUT IT SAYS MY
PARTICIPANT SCREENS.
OH, THERE WE GO.
OK, IT'S COMING UP.
AWESOME.
>> HOPEFULLY THAT'S WORKING.
DID THAT COME TRUE FOR EVERYONE
?
YES, I'M SEEING HADNOT SO HERE
WE GO.
SO ABOUT 15 MINUTES OR SO WORTH
OF CONTENT TO PRESENT HERE.
WE'LL TRY TO MOVE THROUGH IT.
BUT IF THERE ARE CLARIFYING
QUESTIONS THAT COME UP ALONG
THE WAY WE CAN CERTAINLY TACKLE
THOSE AND LOOK FORWARD TO SOME
GOOD DISCUSSION AND HELPING TO
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS THAT WE
CAN ABOUT THIS PROCESS AND WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO BE LOOKING AT.
>> SO A COUPLE OF THINGS TO
TALK THROUGH IN THE
PRESENTATION.
JUST WANTED TO PROVIDE A LITTLE
BIT OF A BACKGROUND AND A
HIGHLIGHT ON HOW RECENT
PROJECTS HAVE BEEN WORKING
TOWARDS OUR COLLECTIVE SHARED
VALUES IN THE DOWNTOWN.
>> AND THEN AS WE PIVOT TOWARDS
WHAT THE STUDY WILL BE LOOKING
AT, THERE'S REALLY FOUR KIND
OF PRIMARY AREAS ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSIT TREATS,
EVENTS, STREETS AND SOME TWO
WAY TRAFFIC RESTORATION
CORRIDORS AND WE'LL BE SHARING
SOME BEST PRACTICES THAT ARE
SHAPING AND INFORMING OUR
APPROACH AS WE LOOK AT THIS AND
THEN SHARING SOME OF OUR
INITIAL ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
AS WELL AND THEN WE'LL TALK
THROUGH NEXT STEPS.
SO I'M ACTUALLY STARTING WITH
THIS SLIDE WHICH IS THE VERY
MESSY SLIDE THAT WILL GET BACK
TO AGAIN AT THE END OF THE
PRESENTATION AND THIS REALLY
GOES TO RAMAN'S POINT ABOUT
WHAT WE'RE GOING TO BE ABLE TO
LOOK AT AND STUDY IN THE
CIRCULATION STUDY WHICH IS THAT
THERE'S LOTS OF DIFFERENT IDEAS
FOR THINGS THAT NEED TO AND
SHOULD HAPPEN IN THE DOWNTOWN
ENVIRONMENT.
THOSE ARE ALL TRYING TO FIT IN
THE SAME NARROW RIGHT AWAY
SPACE.
SO WHETHER THAT'S ADDITIONAL
BIKEWAY CONNECTIONS TRANSIT
PRIORITY CORRIDORS AND THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT TRANSIT
NEEDS LOTS OF DISCUSSION AROUND
NEW EVENTS STREETS CHANGES
POTENTIALLY TO CIRCULATION
PATTERNS IF THERE'S TO A
RESTORATION MOVES FORWARD.
SO HOW THIS ALL SORTS OUT AND
INTEGRATES WE WANT TO BE ABLE
TO LOOK AT THAT COMPREHENSIVELY
AND MAKE SMART DECISIONS ABOUT
WHAT GOES WHERE AND HOW THESE
SYSTEMS AND ALL SUPPORT EACH
OTHER AND WORK WELL TOWARDS
ACHIEVING OUR VALUES.
SO SPEAKING OF VALUES, THE GOOD
NEWS IS IS THAT THE CITY IN A
YOU ALL HAVE BEEN WORKING IN A
NUMBER OF DIFFERENT PARALLEL
EFFORTS TO REALLY SOLIDIFY THE
CITY'S VALUES.
SO WHETHER THAT WAS THROUGH THE
MOVING TOGETHER A COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN, THE DDA IS
ADOPTED VALUES PLANS LIKE EIGHT
ZERO PLAN.
THERE'S A LOT OF OVERLAP AND
SYNERGY HERE.
SO THAT IDEA OF SAFETY,
COMFORT , CONNECTIVITY, ACCESS
EQUITY THOSE ARE ALL REALLY KEY
VALUES AND THEY ALL COME
TOGETHER TO HELP SUPPORT A HIGH
QUALITY OF LIFE NOT JUST IN THE
DOWNTOWN BUT IN THE CITY AS A
WHOLE AND SUPPORT THE VITALITY
OF THE CITY.
SO IT'S REALLY KEY THAT WE
ALWAYS BE GOING BACK TO AND
USING THESE AS A DRIVER FOR OUR
DECISIONS AND YOU KNOW, WE'VE
HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO SEE A
LOT OF THESE GREAT PROJECTS
REALIZED THIS IS JUST A
SNAPSHOT OF SOME OF THEM THAT
ARE IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA IN
RECENT YEARS SOME OF THESE
PROJECTS HAVE BEEN LED DIRECTLY
BY THE CITY, SOME OF THE QUICK
BUILD PROJECT WORK OR THE STATE
AND HILL STREET PROJECT, FOR
EXAMPLE ON THE SOUTH SIDE
OF DOWNTOWN AND THEN THE HAS
ALSO TAKEN THE LEAD ON MANY
OF THESE PROJECTS THAT YOU SEE
LISTED HERE.
THESE HAVE ALL BEEN I SHOULD
SAY IN PARTNERSHIP WITH A LOT
OF COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE
D.A. AND CITY STAFF AND
TRANSPORTATION STAFF TO MAKE
THESE PROJECTS HAPPEN.
AND YOU KNOW, I THINK IT'S
SOMETIMES A LITTLE HARD TO
QUANTIFY BUT WE ARE SEEING AND
AS WE LOOK AT OTHER CASE
STUDIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY A
VERY STRONG CONNECTION BETWEEN
INVESTMENT IN INFRASTRUCTURE
AND THE KINDS OF PROJECTS THAT
YOU ALL ARE PURSUING AND
IMPLEMENTING AND AGAIN GOING
BACK AND PAYING BENEFIT OF THAT
QUALITY OF LIFE, HELPING TO
SUPPORT THE ECONOMIC HEALTH
OF THE CITY, VIBRANCY,
ACTIVITY, ALL OF THOSE THINGS
THAT HELPED MAKE AND HARBOR A
GREAT PLACE TO LIVE.
THAT LINK BETWEEN
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT AND
QUALITY OF LIFE IS REALLY
CRITICAL WHEN WE SHIFT AND LOOK
AT THE SAFETY SIDE OF THE
EQUATION, WE WANT TO DISAPPEAR.
JUST KIND OF A FEW INTERESTING
HIGHLIGHTS OUT OF THAT.
I THINK OVERALL THE DENHA AND
THE CITY HAVE BEEN PUTTING A
LOT OF EFFORT TO DOCUMENT
SAFETY FINDINGS AND TRACK THAT
DATA OVER TIME AS THESE
PROJECTS GET IMPLEMENTED AND WE
ARE SEEING THAT SAFETY IS BEING
IMPROVED GENERALLY ACROSS THE
BOARD FOR ALL USERS OF THE
STREET.
SO WHETHER THAT'S PEOPLE
DRIVING OR BIKING OR WALKING.
SO A COUPLE OF KEY POINTS.
FOR INSTANCE, WHEN THE FIFTH
AND DETROIT PROJECT HAPPENED IN
KOREATOWN, YOU KNOW, WE
ACTUALLY MEASURED THAT CARS
WERE MORE THAN DOUBLE AS LIKELY
TO STOP FOR PEDESTRIAN.
IT'S ACTUALLY ONE FROM LIKE
FORTY SIX PERCENT UP TO LIKE
NINETY EIGHT PERCENT OF CARS
STOPPING.
SO THAT'S A HUGE DIFFERENCE IN
CARS ACTUALLY YIELDING TO
PEDESTRIANS FOR ANYBODY WHO MAY
REMEMBER WHAT THAT SPACE WAS
LIKE BEFORE.
WE'RE ALSO SEEING FOR INSTANCE,
ON FIRST STREET WHEN THE TWO
WAY RESTORATION HAPPENED PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT DECREASES IN
AVERAGE VEHICLE SPEEDS ALONG
THOSE CORRIDOR'S SPEEDS.
>> THE BIGGEST THING THAT WE
CAN DO TO IMPROVE SAFETY AND
REDUCING THE SEVERITY
OF CRASHES FOR THOSE KINDS
OF THINGS ARE REALLY KEY AND
WE'VE BEEN ASSESSING ABOUT 18
MONTHS WORTH OF SAFETY DATA ON
ALL OF THE BIKEWAY STREETS
WHERE THE BIKEWAY LOOPS HAVE
BEEN BUILT AND A COUPLE
OF INTERESTING THINGS THERE
WE'RE SEEING THE ACTUAL RATES
OF CRASHES GO DOWN ACROSS THE
BOARD EVEN AS THE NUMBER
OF RIDERSHIP IN SOME CASES IS
REALLY GOING UP.
WE ARE ACTUALLY SEEING A
REDUCTION IN CRASHES INVOLVING
BICYCLISTS AND PEDESTRIANS
WHICH IS GREAT AND I THINK EVEN
THE MORE PERTINENT PIECE WHICH
ALIGNS WITH VISION ZERO IS THAT
WE STILL DO NOT HAVE ANY
SERIOUS INJURIES OR FATAL
CRASHES THAT ARE OCCURRING FOR
ANY MODE OF TRAVEL ON THE
BIKEWAY STREETS.
SO THAT'S A KEY POINT TO
EMPHASIZE IN KNOW VISION ZERO
IS A CORE PART OF THE GOALS
THAT WE'RE WORKING TOWARDS.
>> PATIENT ZERO DOESN'T MEAN NO
CRASHES.
THERE'S STILL GOING TO BE
ACCIDENTS BUT IT MEANS THAT
WE'RE MOVING TOWARDS HAVING NOT
NO SERIOUS INJURY OR FATAL
CRASHES AND THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
SEEING TO THESE PROJECTS.
SO THAT'S KEY TO EMPHASIZE.
SPEAKING OF BICYCLE
CONNECTIVITY
AND BICYCLE TRIPS,
THE DDA HAS BEGUN A BICYCLE
MONITORING PROGRAM DOING
BICYCLE COUNTS USING FIXED
MONITORS THAT ARE OUT IN PLACE
SEPTEMBER LIKE JUST THE NUMBERS
ARE HUGE.
THEY'RE GETTING ALMOST FORTY
THOUSAND BICYCLE TRIPS OVER THE
MONTH OF SEPTEMBER, WHICH IS
REALLY AWESOME TO SEE.
YOU CAN SEE A LITTLE BIT OF THE
BREAKDOWN THERE OF KIND
OF MONTHLY AVERAGE AND DAILY
TRIPS WHERE WE HAD COLLECTED
PRECONSTRUCTION DATA ON THE
DIVISION STREET BIKE WAY AND ON
THE KATHERINE MILLER STREET
BIKE WAY.
IT'S LIKE A TWO HUNDRED AND
FORTY PERCENT INCREASE IN BIKE
TRAVEL DURING THE PEAK TIMES
AND ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
PERCENT ON MILLER AND
KATHERINE.
SO AGAIN WE ARE SEEING THAT
THESE ARE STARTING TO DRIVE
BICYCLE TRIPS AND THE WILLIAM
STREET BIKE WAY JUST I THINK
THE CONNECTION FROM THE
NEIGHBORHOOD TO U OF M THAT ONE
CONTINUES TO BE VERY HIGHLY
USED BUT IT'S ALSO BEEN AROUND
THE LONGEST SO PEOPLE ARE MOST
USED TO HAVING IT THERE AND
STARTING TO USE IT.
THE DDA ALSO RECENTLY CONDUCTED
A SURVEY WITH BIKEWAY USERS.
THEY SURVEYED A GOT ABOUT TWO
HUNDRED AND NINETY SURVEY
RESPONSES BACK.
THIS WAS SPECIFICALLY TO PEOPLE
THAT ARE USING THE BIKE WAY
TRYING TO UNDERSTAND BETTER
ABOUT HOW THEY'RE USING THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT'S BEEN
BUILT AND KIND OF PULLING OUT
THE DATA FROM THE CHART ON THE
RIGHT THERE THE TOP TWO USES
FOR WHY PEOPLE ARE USING THE
BIKEWAY WAS GETTING DOWNTOWN TO
RUN ERRANDS, DO APPOINTMENTS
AND AND FOR SOCIAL ACTIVITIES
DINING, SHOPPING.
SO SUPPORTING THAT KIND
OF COMMERCIAL AND SERVICE USES
IN THE DOWNTOWN ENVIRONMENT.
SO IT'S GREAT TO SEE THAT
PEOPLE ARE USING IT AND THAT
LIKE THE SECOND POINT HERE
EIGHTY SIX PERCENT MORE LIKELY
TO COME DOWNTOWN BECAUSE OF THE
BIKE WAY FOR MANY PEOPLE YOU
KNOW THIS IS OPENING UP NEW
WAYS OF BEING ABLE TO GET
DOWNTOWN MORE EASILY AND I
THINK PERTINENT FOR THE
DISCUSSION TONIGHT 80 PERCENT
WOULD USE A BIKE WAY MORE IF
THERE ARE MORE CONNECTIONS TO
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT'S SOMETHING
WILL BE COMING BACK TO.
SO WITH THAT I MENTIONED KIND
OF THE AGENDA.
THERE'S FOUR BIG AREAS OF WORK
FOR THE CIRCULATION STUDY IN A
FEW SLIDES ON EACH OF THESE SO
WE CAN KIND OF TALK THROUGH THE
SET UP THE RATIONALE, SOME
OF THE BEST PRACTICES AND THEN
THE PIECES THAT WILL BE LOOKING
AT WITHIN EACH OF THESE.
SO ON THE ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
FRONT THERE'S LOTS OF LANGUAGE
THAT GETS THROWN AROUND FOR
WHAT WE MEAN BY BIKEWAYS AND
SEPARATED BIKE LANES AND ALL
THE OTHER VERBIAGE.
>> WE'VE BEEN KIND OF THINKING
ABOUT THIS AS A LOW STRESS
BICYCLE NETWORK AND THERE'S
LOTS OF WAYS THAT WE CAN GET AT
THAT.
BUT THE IDEA IS IS THAT WE'RE
BUILDING OUT A NETWORK
OF BICYCLE FACILITIES THAT ARE
COMFORTABLE AND ACCESSIBLE AND
OF COURSE SAFE FOR AS MANY
PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE TO ENCOURAGE
THAT RIDERSHIP AND SO THE CITY
IN THE DENHA HAVE MADE SOME
GREAT PROGRESS BUILDING OUT A
COMPLETE LOOP IN THE DOWNTOWN
AND THERE'S SOME CONNECTIONS
COMING OFF OF THAT LOOP
ALREADY.
BUT WE KNOW THAT THERE ARE SOME
GAPS IN GETTING FROM
NEIGHBORHOODS AND OUTLYING
AREAS TO THAT BIKE LOOP AND YOU
WANT TO LOOK AT WAYS THAT WE
CAN EXTEND THAT LOW STRESS
NETWORK INTO THE REST OF THE
CITY PRINCIPALLY AS WE LOOK AT
KIND OF THE DESIGN GUIDANCE AND
WHAT'S REQUIRED TO MAKE THAT
LOW STRESS KIND OF FACILITY
SUCCESSFUL.
THERE'S REALLY GIVEN THE ROAD
CONDITIONS THAT WE HAVE IN THE
DOWNTOWN AND SOME OF THE
CONNECTIONS INTO IT, THERE'S
REALLY TWO BIG TREATMENTS UNDER
DISCUSSION.
ONE OF COURSE ARE THE SEPARATED
BIKEWAYS THAT YOU'RE ALL
FAMILIAR WITH EITHER AS A TWO
WAY KIND OF CYCLE TRACK BIKEWAY
OR POTENTIALLY AS SOME ONE WAY
LANES.
WE DO D FOR INSTANCE ON STATE
STREET GOING SOUTH WITH THE
DELINEATOR YOU KNOW THAT WAS A
NEW ONE.
WE SEPARATED BIKEWAY FACILITY
TO LOOKING AT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
THAT AND THEN SOME CONNECTION
CONNECTIONS THAT ARE MORE OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD KIND
OF RESIDENTIAL STREET MAYBE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR BIKE
BOULEVARD'S OR SHARED STREETS
THAT CREATE A REALLY CALM TREAT
STREET ENVIRONMENT WHERE MORE
PEOPLE WOULD FEEL COMFORTABLE
BIKING AND YOU KNOW SOMETHING
THAT WE GET SOMETIMES ASKED
JEST IS LIKE YOU KNOW, IN EVERY
STREET GOING TO HAVE A
SEPARATED BIKEWAY.
WELL, I THINK THE RESPONSE IS
THAT NOT EVERY STREET NEEDS TO
HAVE A SEPARATED BIKEWAY.
WE NEED TO BE STRATEGIC ABOUT
WHAT STREETS WE DO MAKE THAT
SIGNIFICANT INVESTMENT IN AND
REALLY IT COMES DOWN TO
BALANCING KIND OF ACCESS
COVERAGE AND AVAILABLE STREET
SPACE ALSO RECOGNIZING THAT
THERE'S GOING TO BE OTHER USES
AND OTHER NEEDS FOR FLEXIBILITY
IN THE STREET ENVIRONMENT.
SO IT DOESN'T MAKE SENSE AND
THERE'S NOT REALLY A NEED TO
HAVE EVERY STREET HAVE A
SEPARATED BIKEWAY ON IT.
AND SO SOME OF THE GUIDANCE AS
WE LOOK AT NATIONAL
RECOMMENDATIONS LOOK CASE
STUDIES FROM OTHER CITIES A FEW
THERE'S KIND OF THREE KEY
THINGS TO KEEP IN MIND.
>> ONE IS THAT WE WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE ARE PROVIDING
DIRECT BIKEWAY ACCESS TO REALLY
CRITICAL COMMUNITY
DESTINATION'S PUBLIC SERVICES,
THINGS LIKE THAT.
>> WE WANT TO DRIVE TO PROVIDE
A LOW STRESS CONNECTION WITHIN
TWO BLOCKS OF ANYWHERE IN THE
STUDY AREA WITHIN THE DOWNTOWN
ZONE SO THAT PEOPLE DON'T HAVE
TO GO VERY FAR A BLOCK OR TWO
TO GET ONTO BIKEWAY AND THAT
AND THEN ALSO AS WE LOOK BEYOND
THE DOWNTOWN AT THOSE
CONNECTIONS AND ROUTES INTO
DOWNTOWN THAT WE FIND THOSE
EFFICIENT ROUTES THAT PEOPLE
WANT TO TAKE AND MAKE SURE THAT
THOSE WHO HAVE A LOW STRESS
FACILITY ON THEM SO THAT PEOPLE
WILL USE THEM.
SO THIS WAS KIND OF A QUICK ISH
DIAGRAM JUST SHOWING KIND
OF WHERE WE ARE TODAY AND WHAT
SOME OF THE POTENTIAL IS.
>> SO THE DARKER PURPLE KIND
OF THICK LINE IS THE EXISTING
EXTENT OF SOME OF THE LOW
STRESS ROUTES THAT'S PRIMARILY
THE BIKE LOOPS AND SOME OF THE
SEPARATED BIKE LANES THAT HAVE
BEEN BUILT.
AND WHEN WE THINK ABOUT A LOT
OF THE MAJOR ROADS LEADING INTO
DOWNTOWN MILLER LIBERTY
SELF-MADE THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF IMPROVEMENTS TO ADD BIKE
LANES OR ADD BUFFORD LANES ONTO
THOSE STREETS BUT THEY DON'T
QUITE HIT THE MARK AS FAR AS
BEING A LOW STRESS FACILITY
THAT'S WELCOMING TO THAT
BROADER RANGE OF USERS.
SO THAT'S CREATING SOME GAPS IN
THE NETWORK.
AND SO THROUGH THIS STUDY WE'LL
BE ABLE TO LOOK AT A NUMBER
OF THESE CONNECTIONS AND KIND
OF MAJOR CONDUITS INTO DOWNTOWN
AND START TO SEE WHAT THE
OPPORTUNITY IS TO REALLY EXPAND
THAT LOW STRESS NETWORK.
AND I THINK WHAT'S INTERESTING
TO LOOK AT IN THIS DIAGRAM MORE
SO THAN THESE KIND OF LIGHTER
GREEN AREAS THAT ARE ADDED ON
THAT ARE PROVIDING THAT ARE
JUST A BLOCK AWAY FROM A
POTENTIAL NEW LOW STRESS ROUTE
IS THAT ARE NOW ABLE TO REACH
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT CAN TAKE
THEIR CARMELLO NEIGHBORHOOD
STREETS TO BE ABLE TO ACCESS A
BIKEWAY TO AN EFFICIENTLY BE
ABLE TO GET INTO DOWNTOWN.
SO A LOT OF THE NEIGHBORHOODS
BLUE HERE ONES THAT THEY CAN
CONNECT TO A BIKEWAY WITHOUT
EVER HAVING TO CROSS A MAJOR
STREET THEY CAN GET RIGHT TO
THE BIKEWAY FROM THEIR
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THEN BE ABLE
TO ACCESS DOWNTOWN.
>> SO A LOT OF THESE DASH LINES
ARE PROJECTS THAT WILL EITHER
BE LOOKING AT THROUGH THE
DOWNTOWN AREA.
CIRCULATION'S SPECIFICALLY OR
PROJECTS THAT THE CITY IS
ALREADY LOOKING AT IMPLEMENTING
IMPROVEMENTS ON FOR INSTANCE,
SOUTH MAIN THERE'S A PROJECT ON
STATE STREET SOUTH OF WILLIAM
DOWN TO SOUTH UNIVERSITY THAT'S
UNDERWAY RIGHT NOW THAT'S
LOOKING AT LOW STRESS
CONNECTIONS.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF OPPORTUNITY
HERE WITH THAT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THIS IS THE BIGGEST ONE.
THERE'S MOST MOST STUFF IS IN
THIS TOPIC SO I'LL KEEP US
MOVING.
>> SO SHIFTING OVER TO TRANSIT
STS AND KIND OF WHY TRANSIT STS
AND WHAT DO WE MEAN BY THAT?
YOU KNOW, WE REALLY RECOGNIZE
THAT THE TRANSIT SYSTEM IS AN
INVALUABLE PART OF OUR OVERALL
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM AND
PROVIDING ACCESS FOR A BROAD
RANGE THE COMMUNITY AND EVEN
WELL OUTSIDE OF ANN ARBOR AND
OUTSIDE OF THE DOWNTOWN TO BE
ABLE TO ACCESS JOBS AND OTHER
IMPORTANT DESTINATIONS IN TOWN
.
AND SO I THINK ONE OF THE KEY
FACTORS THAT WE NEED TO BE
LOOKING AT IS HOW DO WE REALLY
MAKE SURE THAT TRANSIT SERVICE
CAN BE PRIORITIZED IN DOWNTOWN
BOTH THE RIDE AND THE EVENT
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN OPERATE
IN OBVIOUSLY TRANSIT SYSTEMS
AND THEY HAVE PLANS FOR
EXPANDED TRANSIT SERVICE, MORE
FREQUENT TRANSIT SERVICE.
ALL OF THAT REALLY REQUIRES
THAT OPERATIONS BE MORE MORE
TIMELY, MORE SMOOTHLY, MORE
PREDICTABLE TO HELP SUPPORT
RIDERSHIP AND GREATER TRANSIT
USE.
THAT DOES MEAN THAT WE NEED TO
START THINKING ABOUT DEDICATED
TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE AND WHAT
THAT MIGHT MEAN IN THE DOWNTOWN
ENVIRONMENT.
THERE ARE SOME DEDICATED
TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS THAT HAVE HAPPENED
ALREADY.
I'M THROUGH THESE PROJECTS FOR
INSTANCE, THE IMAGE ON THE LEFT
IS THE DIVISION'S STREET
BIKEWAY WHERE THERE WAS AN
INLINE BUS BOARDING ISLAND THAT
WAS BUILT THAT'S RAISED SO THAT
BUSSES CAN STOP AND LANE PEOPLE
CAN GET ON AND OFF THE BUS AND
THE BUS OPERATIONS CAN CONTINUE
TO WORK SMOOTHLY THERE.
BUT THERE'S A LOT OF OTHER
TREATMENTS THAT OTHER
COMMUNITIES ARE USING
SUCCESSFULLY TO SUPPORT TRANSIT
AND THIS STUDY WILL BE ABLE TO
START TO LOOK AT ALL OF THOSE
DIFFERENT MIXES OF USES
IMPROVEMENTS TO SIGNALS AND A
SMART SIGNAL SYSTEMS THAT CAN
TALK TO BUSSES AND ADJUST THEIR
TIMING THAT BUSSES GET THROUGH
POTENTIALLY TRANSIT LANES OR
YOU JUMP LANES TO HELP US GET
THROUGH INTERSECTIONS AND MAYBE
POTENTIALLY EVEN SOME TRANSIT
ALL KINDS OF STREETS WHERE A
VEHICLE USE MAY BE MORE
RESTRICTED AND IT'S FOCUSED
MORE ON TRANSIT AND ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION USES.
AND THEN I DID JUST WANT TO
STEP BACK AND SAY THAT THE RIDE
COMPLETED LAST YEAR THERE ARE
TWENTY FORTY FIVE LONG RANGE
PLAN THAT CALLS FOR HIGH
FREQUENCY SERVICE PRIORITY
TRANSIT SERVICE AND ALSO BUS
RAPID TRANSIT ALL OF WHICH COME
INTO AND THROUGH THE DOWNTOWN
AND U OF M SIMILARLY HAS SOME
HIGH PRIORITY IN HIGH RIDERSHIP
THAT TRANSIT PLANS IN THEIR
COMPREHENSIVE CAMPUS PLAN THAT
THEY'RE WORKING ON RIGHT NOW.
SO HOW DO WE KIND OF UNDERSTAND
THESE BROADER TRANSPORTATION
PATTERNS, HOW THEY FIT INTO THE
DOWNTOWN START TO LOOK AT
SPECIFIC OPPORTUNITIES WHERE WE
CAN IMPROVE THE PERFORMANCE AND
RELIABILITY OF TRANSIT AND
POINT THREE, THERE IS IMPORTANT
TO THIS RECOGNIZING AT
INTERMODAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
TRANSIT PEDESTRIANS BICYCLE
RIDERS AND THAT THESE USES ALL
NEED TO BE ABLE TO SUPPORT EACH
OTHER AND ARE MADE STRONGER
WHEN THEY WORK TOGETHER.
SO WE WANT TO BE LOOKING AT ALL
OF THOSE THINGS AS WE SHIFT TO
THE DOWNTOWN.
THIS IS A KIND OF DELIBERATELY
FUZZY MAP.
THERE'S A LOT OF DIFFERENT
ROUTES AGAIN THAT YOU AVAM THE
RIDE ARE LOOKING AT FOR
POTENTIAL PRIORITY SERVICE IN
THE DOWNTOWN AREA.
WHERE ARE THESE ROUTES
ULTIMATELY LAND WHAT THE
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS ARE
THAT GO ALONG WITH HOW THEY
SQUARE WITH OTHER STREET USES
NEEDS TO BE SORTED OUT AND
LOOKED AT AT A FINER LEVEL
OF DETAIL WILL BE ABLE TO DO
THAT THROUGH THIS DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY.
OK, TWO MORE.
SO THE THIRD TOPIC THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT IS ON EVENT STREETS
AND YOU KNOW, I THINK GOING
BACK TO THE EARLY DAYS OF THE
PANDEMIC WITH THE CITY'S
DOWNTOWN HEALTHY STREETS
PROJECT SOME OF THE STREET
CLOSURES THAT CAME OUT OF THAT
THE SUPPORT BUSINESSES AT THE
TIME WE'VE SEEN THAT BE
SOMETHING THAT WAS SUCCESSFUL
AND SUPPORTED BUSINESSES THEN
BUT IT'S CONTINUED ON TO
SUPPORT BUSINESSES AS KIND OF A
FUN AND KIND OF ENERGIZING
APPROACH TO SUPPORTING DOWNTOWN
COMMERCIAL USES TODAY.
AND I THINK THAT'S GENERATED A
LOT OF DISCUSSION AROUND SAY
PEDESTRIAN STREETS OR
PEDESTRIAN MALLS.
SHOULD WE BE LOOKING AT THOSE
AND WHAT OTHER IDEAS ARE ON THE
NEXT?
AND SO AS WE START TO LOOK AT
EVENTS RATES THAT ARE IN PLACE
TODAY IN ANN ARBOR AND WHAT
OTHER ONES MIGHT COME ONLINE OR
HOW THOSE WINEGROWER EVOLVE, WE
WANTED TO STEP BACK AND LOOK AT
REALLY A CONTINUUM OF DIFFERENT
KINDS OF EVENTS STREETS ALL THE
WAY ON THE RIGHT YOU DO HAVE
STREETS LIKE PEDESTRIAN MALLS
OR THAT APPROACH OR STREET
WOULD BE CLOSED FOR VEHICLE USE
YEAR ROUND.
BUT THERE'S A WHOLE CONTINUUM
OF THINGS IN BETWEEN MORE
SHARED STREET DESIGNS WITH
STREETS LIKE ON STATE STREET A
LOT OF GREAT SUCCESS CAN BE HAD
WITH MORE FORMAL SEASONAL
STREET PROGRAMS KIND OF HOW
WASHINGTON STREET THAT ONE
BLOCK EAST OF ASHLEY WORKS
TODAY OR IT'S BASICALLY SHUT
DOWN ALMOST ALMOST YEAR ROUND
EXCEPT FOR THE WINTER MONTHS
WE'RE LOOKING AT MORE
TRADITIONAL KIND OF FLEXIBLE
STREETS SO THERE'S LOTS
OF DIFFERENT WAYS AND DIFFERENT
TOOLS FOR HELPING TO REACH OUR
OBJECTIVES AND BE ABLE TO
MAINTAIN FLEXIBILITY AS WELL.
SO AS YOU START TO LOOK AT THE
DOWNTOWN WE CAN THINK ABOUT
THAT WHOLE MIX AND I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT TO CONSIDER THAT
RANGE BECAUSE THERE ARE A LOT
OF FACTORS THAT PLAY INTO WHAT
CAN MAKE AN EVENT STREET
SUCCESSFUL REGARDLESS OF WHAT
THE TYPE OF FACILITY ULTIMATELY
IS.
AT THE END OF THE DAY I THINK
THE KEY HERE IS THAT KIND
OF ACROSS ALL OF THIS IS THAT
THE EVENT STREET IMPROVEMENTS
THEMSELVES ARE NOT WHAT'S GOING
TO BE DRIVING THE SUCCESS
OF THAT SPACE AS AN EVENT
STREET.
THE EVENT STREET IMPROVEMENTS
HELP SUPPORT ACTIVITIES USES
THINGS THAT BRING PEOPLE OUT
THAT ARE ALREADY EXISTING OR
THAT GET BUILT UP AND PROGRAMED
SO THAT DENSITY AND KIND
OF ACTIVE SET OF USES IS
IMPORTANT TO HAVE THAT IN PLACE
TODAY IF YOU JUST CREATE AN
EVENT STREET AND IT DOESN'T
HAVE THOSE USERS, IT'S NOT
NECESSARILY GOING TO BE VERY
SUCCESSFUL.
SO THESE ARE SOME OF THE
CRITERIA AND THINGS THAT WE
WANT TO START LOOKING AT AS WE
THINK ABOUT EVENT STREETS AND
THERE ARE OPPORTUNITIES.
SO THIS MAP JUST SHOWS A NUMBER
OF THE CORRIDORS THAT ARE UNDER
CONSIDERATION RIGHT NOW LARGELY
KIND OF COMMERCIAL DESTINATION
AREAS WITH A HIGH CONCENTRATION
AND OF ACTIVE COMMERCIAL USES.
THIS IS ALSO WHERE A LOT OF THE
HEALTHY STREET OR SOCIAL
DISTRICT STREETS ARE WHERE
WE'RE ALREADY SEEING A PATTERN
OF LOTS OF CAFE DINING USES,
THE CAFE PERMIT USES THINGS
LIKE THAT.
SO WE'LL BE LOOKING AT THESE
CORRIDORS IN MORE DETAIL AND
IT'S ALSO WORTH MENTIONING HERE
THAT FOR INSTANCE ON LIBERTY
STREET IT WOULDN'T BE THE
INTENT THAT ALL OF LIBERTY
STREET BE CLOSED TURNED INTO AN
EVENT STREET THAT'S AN OPTION.
BUT WE REALLY DO WANT TO LOOK
KIND OF BLOCK BY BLOCK AT WHERE
IT CAN OR MIGHT NOT BE
SUCCESSFUL AND AND SO IT'S
REALLY A BLOCK BY BLOCK
ANALYSIS HERE AS WE THINK ABOUT
THE EVENT STREETS AND WHAT
MIGHT WORK.
OK, LAAR LOOKING AT FIFTH IN
DIVISION AND TO A RESTORATION I
JUST WANTED TO MENTION A FEW
KIND OF HIGH LEVEL REASONS WHY
ARE WE EVEN TALKING ABOUT TWO
WAY RESTORATION'S WE HAD A LOT
OF COMMUNITY CONVERSATION WHEN
FIRST NATIONALLY WERE CONVERTED
OR RESTORED BACK TO TO WAY
TRAVEL A NUMBER OF YEARS AGO
AND THOSE REASONS AND
RATIONALES FOR THAT HAVE BEEN
BORNE OUT AND WHAT WE'RE SEEING
AND HOW WE'VE SEEN THOSE
STREETS EVOLVED AND BE USED
THOUGH GENERALLY TO WAY STREETS
ARE GOING TO PROMOTE A MORE
CALM, SAFE ENVIRONMENT FOR ALL
PEOPLE REGARDLESS OF MODE
OF TRAVEL REDUCES THINGS LIKE
THE DOUBLE THREAT OF HAVING
MULTIPLE LANES GOING IN ONE
DIRECTION AND ONE CAR STOPS OR
SOMEBODY AND THE OTHER ONE
DOESN'T AND THERE'S LOTS
OF KIND OF FUNCTIONAL SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS TO BE HAD.
IT IMPROVES WAYFINDING ADVOCATE
ABILITY AND ACCESS INTO
DOWNTOWN AND THE TWO WAY
STREETS GENERALLY ARE MORE
CONDUCIVE TO PEDESTRIAN
ACTIVITY AND VIBRANCY.
WE'RE SEEING THAT THROUGH THOSE
PROJECTS.
>> SO FOR THE CIRCULATION
STUDY, WHAT WILL BE EVALUATING
IS THE TWO WAY RESTORATION
FEASIBILITY AS WELL AS BENEFITS
AND COSTS FOR FIFTH AND
DIVISION AND PUTTING US BACK
INTO TO A TRAVEL THAT DOES ALSO
MEAN LOOKING BEAKS AND SPEAKS
IS CURRENTLY ONE WAY AND THAT
KIND OF FUNCTIONS AS A SYSTEM
OF ONE WAY LOOPS.
WE NEED TO LOOK AT HOW THE
CIRCULATION PATTERNS ARE TO
ACTUALLY WORK THROUGH ALL
OF THAT AND THAT IT DOES MEAN
ALSO UNPACKING KIND OF THE
BROADWAY BRIDGE INTERCHANGE
AREA WHERE A LOT OF THESE
STREETS ARE ALL COMING TOGETHER
IN KIND OF A VERY KIND
OF SPAGHETTI MASS OF CROSSINGS
AND DIFFERENT ROADS ALL COMING
TOGETHER THERE AND THINKING
THROUGH HOW THAT WOULD WORK
UNDER A TWO WAY TRAVEL
SCENARIO.
>> AND SO OF COURSE, YOU KNOW,
THROUGH THIS WE NEED TO BE
THINKING ABOUT, YOU KNOW, OUR
IMPACT TO OUR TRANSIT
OPERATIONS AND WORK.
HOW ARE THE BIKEWAYS BEING
INTEGRATED INTO THIS?
SO THESE ARE ALL IMPORTANT
FACTORS THAT WILL LOOK AT
THROUGH THIS STUDY.
>> SO JUST TO WRAP UP KIND
OF AGAIN THIS WAS THAT MAP FROM
THE BEGINNING THAT SHOWS ALL
OF THESE THINGS SORT OF STACKED
AND LAYERED ON TOP.
A LOT TO UNPACK AS WE WORK
THROUGH THIS STUDY AND KIND
OF WHERE WE'VE BEEN OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF MONTHS.
WE'VE BEEN COLLECTING A RANGE
OF KIND OF BASELINE MULTIMODAL
DATA INCLUDING BIKE PEDESTRIAN
AND VEHICLE COUNTS TO OVER 60
DIFFERENT INTERSECTIONS
THROUGHOUT THE DOWNTOWN SO WE
CAN JUST START TO ASSESS AND
UNDERSTAND HOW THINGS ARE
OPERATING.
WE'VE BEGUN A LOT OF PARTNER
MEETINGS FOR INSTANCE WITH
EIGHTY-EIGHT AND USE THEM TO
GET A BETTER UNDERSTANDING
OF THEIR PLANS, THEIR
ASPIRATIONS AND WHAT THEIR
SYSTEM NEEDS ARE.
SO THROUGH THE REST OF THIS
YEAR WE'RE GOING TO BE
CONTINUING OUR ANALYSIS WORK
AND STARTING TO ACTUALLY PUT
CONCEPTS TOGETHER FOR ALL THESE
DIFFERENT IDEAS THOUGH ALL
THOSE DIFFERENT BIKEWAYS ANY
ONE OF THOSE MAY HAVE A COUPLE
OF DIFFERENT OPTIONS THAT ARE
POTENTIAL TO HOW TO MAKE A LOW
STRESS FACILITY WORK.
SIMILARLY ON THE TRANSIT
CORRIDORS, THE EVENT STREETS.
AND SO WE'RE GOING TO BE
LOOKING THROUGH THOSE DIFFERENT
OPTIONS, PUTTING DIFFERENT
CONCEPTS TOGETHER AND THEN
EARLY NEXT YEAR WE'LL BE
SITTING DOWN TO START TO LOOK
AT WHAT ARE THESE OPTIONS MAKES
SENSE.
WHAT ARE THE PRIORITIES WITHIN
IT?
HOW DO WE START TO SEPARATE
WHICH OPTION GOES WHERE IN
LIGHT OF BALANCING USES ACROSS
THE WHOLE SYSTEM AND THEY'LL BE
CONTINUED STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT AND OUTREACH THROUGH
ALL OF THAT.
OK, THAT WAS A LOT OF TALKING
SO YOU PROBABLY HAVE QUESTIONS
AND I THINK SO LAURA AND I ARE
AVAILABLE TO ANSWER AS WELL AS
AMBER AND RAYMOND AND TREVOR
WAS ON AS WELL.
YEAH.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THIS WAS REALLY GOOD AND JUST
AS I WAS SAYING I THINK THAT'S
REALLY WELL WHAT SOME OF THE
THE CURBSIDES STUDY STUFF THAT
WE WERE TALKING ABOUT AS WELL.
ANY QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS FROM
ANYBODY?
YEAH, SORRY I'M ASKING SOME
QUESTIONS.
>> NO, THIS IS GREAT.
I'M ONE OF YOUR SLIDES OLIVER
HAD I THINK IT WAS A BIKE LANE
ONE A LITTLE BIT EARLIER I
WANTED TO CLARIFY WHAT THERE
WAS YOU HAD SHOWED I BELIEVE
TWO OR THREE GAPS IN THE BIKE
LANE PATH.
UH, YEAH THAT ONE IS TWO.
IS IS THAT SOMETHING THAT'S
BEING WORKED ON OR IS IT JUST
AN ID THAT THIS IS A GAP AND
THEN ARE PEOPLE THEN FORCED TO
GO ON TO A ROAD IN THIS?
>> CAN YOU BETTER HELP ME
UNDERSTAND YOU'RE REFERRING TO
THESE TWO GAPS THAT ARE STILL
KIND OF LEFT ON THIS MAP HERE
FOR IS THAT THE OLD MAP?
>> THIS WOULD BE KIND OF WOULD
BE THE PROPOSED ONE ESSENTIALLY
I THINK THESE ARE THESE ARE
SPOTS THAT WE WE CAN START TO
LOOK AT TO WITHIN THE
CIRCULATION STUDY A COUPLE
OF CHALLENGES THAT ARE GETTING
A LITTLE WAYS OUTSIDE OF THE
DISTRICT.
SO HOW THAT DOVETAILS WITH WHAT
THE CITY MAY BE LOOKING AT AND
THOSE AREAS THAT'S A
CONVERSATION THAT WE CAN SORT
THROUGH ON THIS.
YOU KNOW, THE ONE OVER HERE IS
KIND OF WHERE WASHTENAW COMES
IN AND HITS HILL STREET AND
THAT WHOLE AREA WASHTENAW
ITSELF IS AN IMPORTANT CORRIDOR
AS MANY OF YOU MAY KNOW IN THE
CITY'S WORKING THROUGH A STUDY
KIND OF LOOKING AT WHAT THE
FUTURE OF THOSE CORRIDORS MIGHT
POTENTIALLY BE.
SO THAT'S AN AREA THAT I THINK
IS GOING TO NEED SOME CONTINUED
AND ONGOING DISCUSSION TO
FIGURE OUT
WHAT'S THE BEST WAY
TO MAKE A CONNECTION THROUGH
THEIR AGAIN, THAT'S NOT TO SAY
THAT WE'RE IGNORING THAT IN
THIS STUDY BUT IT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE CAN START START TO LOOK
AT.
THERE'S NOT REALLY A CLEAR
ANSWER AT THE MOMENT FOR HOW WE
WORK THROUGH THAT.
>> BUT WE DO KNOW THAT THIS HAS
A LOT OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS THAT
PEOPLE MAY NEED EVEN THOUGH
IT'S OUTSIDE THE DENHA
BOUNDARY.
>> YES, FOR SURE.
>> PETER, FIRST I WOULD JUST
LIKE TO SAY THANK YOU FOR
ASKING QUESTIONS AND PLEASE
DON'T PLEASE DON'T WORRY ABOUT
ASKING TOO MANY.
I THINK IT'S GREAT ABOUT THE
SLIDE THAT YOU HAVE ABOUT I I
REALLY LIKE THIS NETWORK THAT
YOU'RE PROPOSING.
I MEAN I'M NOT SURE THAT I
AGREE WITH EVERYTHING ON IT BUT
I JUST I REALLY LIKE THE
APPROACH THAT YOU'RE TAKING TO
DEVELOPING IT AND SO THIS IS
ONE OF THE BETTER NETWORK
PROPOSALS THAT I THINK I'VE
SEEN.
SO THAT'S A COMMENT.
THE QUESTION I HAVE ABOUT THIS
THOUGH IS IS THAT YOU'RE
SHOWING A NETWORK EXTENDING OUT
INTO THE NEIGHBORHOODS AND I
THINK THAT'S GREAT AND THAT'S
WHAT I WANT.
I WANT TO HAVE ONE OF THESE
CYCLEWAYS NEAR MY HOUSE SO I
CAN GET ON IT RIGHT DOWNTOWN.
BUT I'M I GUESS I'M A LITTLE
CONCERNED THAT A SOLUTION THAT
WORKS DOWNTOWN LIKE A LIKE A
BIDIRECTIONAL BIKEWAY DOWNTOWN
MIGHT NOT BE THE RIGHT THING
FOR OUT IN THE NEIGHBORHOODS
WHERE WE HAVE HIGHER SPEEDS AND
JUST DIFFERENT SCENARIOS WITH
NEIGHBORHOODS AND AND DRIVEWAYS
AND SO FORTH.
SO PLEASE BE SURE TO INCLUDE
SOLUTIONS FOR YOU KNOW, EITHER
INCLUDE SOLUTIONS THAT WOULD
WORK IN THOSE AREAS OR SOME WAY
TO TRANSITION FROM WHAT WE HAVE
DOWNTOWN TO WHAT WE WOULD WANT
OUT IN THE IN THAT FURTHER
AREAS OUTSIDE OF DOWNTOWN IN
THE NEIGHBORHOODS THAT MIGHT
MAKE SENSE.
OK, ALL RIGHT.
SO THAT IS ONE COMMENT AND THE
OTHER ONE WAS YOUR SHOWING
FILLING IN GAPS THAT YOU
IDENTIFIED ON A PREVIOUS SLIDE
AND THAT'S GREAT AND THAT
THAT'S REALLY THE RIGHT WAY TO
PRESENT THIS.
I THINK.
BUT I WOULD REALLY LIKE YOUR
STUDY TO IDENTIFY HOW WE SHOULD
BE PRIORITIZING THE GAPS SO
THAT WHEN IT COMES TIME TO DO
IT LIKE I WANT TO KNOW WHICH
ONE OF THESE IS GOING TO HAVE
THE MOST BANG FOR THE BUCK LIKE
WE NEED TO DO THAT ONE FIRST
AND IT MIGHT NOT BE THE
CHEAPEST ONE AND IT MIGHT NOT
BE THE EASIEST ONE BUT IT MIGHT
BE THE ONE THAT WE PUT THE
EFFORT AND TIME INTO AND JUST
IS IS THAT THE GAME CHANGER?
YOU KNOW, LIKE IT IT GIVES IT
GIVES MORE THAN IT COSTS GIVES
BACK MORE THAN IT COSTS.
SO I LIKE SOME WAY TO HELP
QUANTIFY THAT TO HELP US IN OUR
DECISION MAKING AND
PRIORITIZING THE FUTURE.
>> SO THAT AND YEAH I DON'T
KNOW IF YOU WANT ME ADDED ADD
ANYTHING JUST MENTIONED THAT IN
TREVOR RAYMOND CAN JUMP IN.
I KNOW FOR INSTANCE ON MAIN FOR
EXAMPLE YOU KNOW THERE WAS THE
ROAD DIET THAT WAS DONE AT
RELATIVELY LOW COST RIGHT TO
ADD BUFFORD LANES ON AND I
THINK THE CITY IS NOW LOOKING
AT GOING THROUGH AND PUTTING
YOU KNOW, DELINEATOR AND
POTENTIALLY RIGHT TO MAKE THAT
MORE OF A PROTECTED FACILITY
GOING SOUTH OR THINGS LIKE
THAT.
SO TO YOUR POINT ABOUT PHASING,
THERE MAY ALSO BE WAYS TO SORT
OF INCREMENTALLY PHASE THINGS
IN TO BE ABLE TO GET ACTION
SOONER ON SOME ITEMS AS AN
INTERIM SOLUTION AND THEN BE
ABLE TO BUILD IT OUT IN A MORE
PERMANENT WAY OVER TIME.
>> SO THOSE ARE DEFINITELY
THINGS THAT WE CAN BE LOOKING
AT THROUGH THIS.
WELL, YEAH, THANKS FOR THIS.
THAT'S GREAT.
I'VE BEEN HEARING ABOUT THE
CIRCULATION STUDY FOR A LONG
TIME.
I'M GLAD TO SEE THE WAYS THAT
THE CITY IS BROADENING THE
PERSPECTIVE BEYOND JUST THE
IMMEDIATE DOWNTOWN I'M CURIOUS
ABOUT BECAUSE I UNDERSTAND THAT
THIS IS ORIGINALLY A DDA
PROJECT AND SO IT HAS TO CENTER
ON THE DOWNTOWN.
BUT ONE OF OUR REAL WEAKNESSES
IS OUR CONNECTIVITY BETWEEN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO AROUND DOWNTOWN AND I'M
CURIOUS ABOUT IF THE CITY IS
THINKING ABOUT WAYS TO EXTEND
THIS EITHER AFTERWARDS OR SORT
OF IN PARALLEL TO BE LOOKING AT
THOSE PLACES WHERE IT'S IT'S
DIFFICULT OR IMPOSSIBLE TO GET
FROM FROM ONE NEIGHBORHOOD TO
ANOTHER IN A SAFE AND DIRECT
WAY.
>> YEAH, I THINK I'LL TAKE A
STAB AT THIS, ALLOW OTHERS TO
CHIME IN AS WELL.
YOU'RE RIGHT ABOUT THE
GEOGRAPHY.
WE ARE FOCUSED ON THE DOWNTOWN.
OBVIOUSLY THE DENHA IS THE
MAJOR PARTNER IN TAKING ON THIS
SO IT MAKES SENSE TO FOCUS ON
THE DOWNTOWN AND THE GEOGRAPHY
THAT THEY CAN HELP SUPPORT.
BUT AGAIN, OBVIOUSLY BEING THE
NUCLEUS OF CITY THAT MAKES A
LOT OF SENSE FROM THE CITY'S
PERSPECTIVE AS WELL.
SO I THINK IT'S A GREAT
PARTNERSHIP.
THE OTHER THING TO NOTE IS WELL
I THINK WE CAN LEARN FROM THE
STUDY AND SEE WHAT CAN BE
TRANSLATED OUTSIDE OF THE
DOWNTOWN.
WE'RE HAPPY TO DO THAT.
I THINK WE WILL NOT PUT OUR
BLINDERS ON WHERE THESE LINES
AND THAT'S THE END THE END
OF THE WORLD THERE.
I THINK THAT THAT'S NOT HOW WE
WOULD APPROACH IT AND I WOULD
SAY THERE ARE OTHER
COMPLEMENTARY EFFORTS THAT ARE
UNDERWAY.
SO OBVIOUSLY WITH WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO WITH THE IP AND
INTEGRATION OF THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND THE ALL
AGES AND THAT NETWORK TRYING TO
MAKE SURE THAT ANY TIME WE
TOUCH A STREET THAT WE REFLECT
WHAT THE PLAN CALLS FOR.
SO THAT'S ONE THING I THINK
MOST OF YOU PROBABLY KNOW THE
COUNCIL HALF THE RESOLUTION
THAT YOU ALL SUGGESTED RELATED
TO ROADS.
SO YOU'RE GETTING TO THE POINT
THAT YOU MENTIONED ABOUT THE
GAP FOR EXAMPLE, THAT WILL BE
ANALYZED FOR A ROAD AND I'M
LOOKING AT SEVERAL THINGS THAT
THAT SPACE COULD BE REALLOCATED
TOWARDS AND SCHOOL
INFRASTRUCTURE BEING ONE
OF THEM THE DEDICATED TRANSIT
STRUCTURE BEING ANOTHER AND
THOSE NEED NOT NECESSARILY BE
MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE.
THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
BOTH.
SO SO YEAH, I THINK THERE WILL
BE OPPORTUNITIES BUT THAT BE
THERE WON'T BE A SEPARATE
STANDALONE STUDY, YOU KNOW,
TAKING THIS AND LOOKING
OUTWARD.
I THINK WHAT WE'LL DO IS JUST
KIND OF PIGGYBACK OFF
OF EXISTING EFFORTS LOOKING AT
THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND
LEVERAGING THAT THE TRUNK LINE
TRANSPORT STUDY ALL OF THESE
DIFFERENT THINGS TO STACK ON
TOP OF ONE ANOTHER FOR THOSE
OPPORTUNITIES AND WE'RE REALLY
TRYING TO GET THOUGHTFUL ABOUT
HOW WE PROCESS THIS WORK OR
THANKS.
>> ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR
QUESTIONS AT THIS POINT AND
WELL THANKS SO MUCH.
AND YEAH, IT'S JUST BEEN
EXTREMELY ENCOURAGING.
I REMEMBER GOING TO THE OPENING
OF THE WILLIAM STREET BIKE WAY
BACK IN THE DAY BACK IN THE DAY
NOW.
SO JUST SEEING LIKE HOW THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT CONTINUED
HAS BEEN REALLY ENCOURAGING AND
SEEING THE DATA AND EVERYTHING
SO THANKS SO MUCH.
>> I THINK WE CAN MOVE ON AND
YEAH OF COURSE IF THERE'S ANY
OTHER QUESTIONS THAT COME IN
FEEL FREE TO EMAIL.
WE CAN PASS THOSE ON SO WE'LL
MOVE ON NOW TO COMMUNICATIONS
YOU RECEIVED YOUR STOCK REPORT
PROVIDING PROJECT UPDATES WITH
YOUR AGENDA MATERIALS AND ALL.
>> RAYMOND REVIEW THE REPORT
AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
.
ALL RIGHT.
ON MY SCREEN SHOWING
APPROPRIATELY.
ALL RIGHT.
VERY GOOD.
THANK YOU.
I GOT TO JUMP IN HERE, RAYMOND.
I FEEL LIKE THERE'S SOME SORT
OF AUDIO DISTORTION ON YOUR END
WITH DOUBLING IT UP AND I'M
MAYBE I'M ONLY ONE HEARING IT
BUT IF YOU COULD MUTE AND
UNMUTED OK, LET ME TRY THAT.
>> YEAH, I MENTIONED THAT AS
WELL.
HOW ABOUT NOW THAT WE'RE DOING
ED STILL SOUNDS LIKE A ROCK
STAR DOUBLE-SIDED THING GOING
ON.
>> I WAS GOING TO SAY MAX
HEADROOM THAT THANK YOU FOR THE
EIGHTIES REFERENCE.
SEE I CAN DIAL IN REAL QUICKLY
IF YOU WILL HUMOR ME FOR JUST A
MOMENT AND
MAYBE TRY AGAIN
STILL COMING THROUGH ECHOEY OK
SORRY AHRIMAN
YOU CAN DO IT
RIGHT NOW.
I DO QUALIFIED NOW OTHERA OUT
OF ONE OF THE MANY
ALL RIGHT AM
I COMING THROUGH BETTER NOW.
YES A THUMBS UP AND WE'VE GOT
MULTIPLE RAMAN'S THE MEETING
NOW WHICH IS GREAT THAT SOUNDS
LIKE A CURSE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO MAYBE FOR VENUS BENEFIT
AGAIN WELCOME TO THE
COMMISSION.
WE'RE SUPER EXCITED TO HAVE
YOU.
ONE THING WE DO AT EVERY
TRANSPORTATION MEETING IS WE
GIVE AN UPDATE ON ALL THE
PROJECTS THAT WE'RE CURRENTLY
TRACKING IN THE TRANSPORTATION
SPACE.
ONE THING TO NOTE THOUGH IS
BASED ON SOME RECOMMENDATIONS
FROM THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION A COUPLE OF YEARS
AGO WE REALLY ONLY HIGHLIGHT
PROJECTS THAT HAVE A STATUS
CHANGE FROM ONE MONTH TO THE
NEXT.
SO THIS IS NOT THE TOTALITY
OF ALL THE PROJECTS THAT WE'VE
BEEN WORKING ON OVER THE COURSE
OF THE YEAR.
SOME PROJECTS COME AND THEY GO
DEPENDING UPON WHAT SORT
OF ACTIVITY AND THEN ONCE
THEY'RE COMPLETE KIND OF FALL
OFF THE LIST.
BUT IT DOES PROVIDE A PRETTY
GOOD RECORD OF THE SORT OF WORK
THAT'S HAPPENING CURRENTLY.
NOW WHAT'S KIND OF INTERESTING
THIS TIME OF YEAR THE LIST GETS
A LOT SHORTER BECAUSE A LOT
OF PROJECTS HAVE BEEN COMPLETED
AND THEN COME JANUARY OR
FEBRUARY THE LIST WILL GET LONG
AGAIN AND YOU'LL SEE A LOT
OF UPDATES THAT THIS PROJECT IS
UNDER DESIGN OR UNDERGOING
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND THEN COME
SUMMER YOU'LL REALLY SEE THINGS
RAMP UP WHEN CONSTRUCTION
STARTS.
SO THAT'S JUST KIND OF A LITTLE
PRIMER IN TERMS OF HOW WE
APPROACH THIS PART OF THE
AGENDA.
SO WE ALWAYS HAVE A STANDING
ITEM ABOUT THE RESURFACING
LARGELY WE DIRECT PEOPLE BACK
TO THE WEBSITE.
THERE'S A LOT OF INFORMATION IN
TERMS OF PROGRESS AND WHICH
ROADS ARE BEING FOCUSED.
THERE WILL BE A PRESENTATION IN
FEBRUARY BASED ON WHAT NEXT
YEAR'S RESURFACING PROGRAM WILL
LOOK LIKE AND WHAT AREAS WILL
BE FOCUSED ON.
SO THAT'LL BE A GOOD
OPPORTUNITY FOR YOU TO KIND
OF SEE WHAT THE CITY HAS
PLANNED BOTH IN TERMS OF THE
NEIGHBORHOOD RESURFACING AS
WELL AS ON MAJOR STREETS AS
WELL AS SIDEWALK GAPS.
THERE'S SOME ADDITIONAL
COMPLETIONS NAMELY ON BROOKS
AND RAYMOND.
WHERE ARE YOU GOING TO SHARE
YOUR FROM YOUR HEART IN
PARTICULAR WAS RELATED TO THE
ROAD PROJECT AS WELL AS I'M
THROUGH OK, WHERE ARE YOU GOING
TO SHARE YOUR SCREEN RAYMOND OH
THANK YOU FOR THAT
.
THERE WE GO THERE NOW.
YES.
ALL RIGHT.
OK SO THERE'S THE RESURFACING
PROJECTS THERE THE SIDEWALK
APPS LIKE I MENTIONED BRICKS IN
YOUR HEART AND NOW COMPLETE
ADDING TO THE LIST OF OTHERS
THAT HAVE BEEN DONE AS WELL.
MILLER AVENUE I THINK SOME
OF YOU MAY HAVE HAD A CHANCE TO
ATTEND THE PUBLIC MEETING THAT
WAS HELD ON OCTOBER 19TH.
THERE IS A PROJECT WEBSITE NOW
AT MILLER HAVE PRETTY MUCH THE
CITY'S WEBSITE WITH THE
EXTENSION.
ONE THING TO NOTE JUST BECAUSE
WE'VE GOTTEN SOME QUESTIONS AND
KIND OF MAYBE A LITTLE BIT
OF CONFUSION OVER THIS THE
MEETING THAT WAS HELD IN
OCTOBER NINETEENTH WAS LARGELY
FOCUSED ON A LOT OF THE
UNDERGROUND INFRASTRUCTURE.
ONE OF THE MAPS THAT YOU SAW
PRESENTED BY OLIVER TONIGHT
SHOWED A DASH LINE ALONG MILLER
AND I THANK YOU FOR THIS
PREVIOUSLY REPORT THAT WE ARE
LOOKING AT OPPORTUNITIES TO
EXTEND THE DDA CYCLE TRACK THAT
IS ON FIRST ON KATHERINE
EXTENDING THAT FURTHER TO THE
WEST POSSIBLY AS FAR WEST AS
PEOPLE.
SO WE ARE CURRENTLY WORKING ON
AN ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY ON THAT
WE HAVE LAUNCHED DESIGN ON
THAT.
I THINK THAT WAS LAST MONTH AND
WE'RE LOOKING FOR ENGAGEMENT
PROBABLY IN THE FIRST QUARTER
OF THE NEXT CALENDAR YEAR,
PROBABLY IN JANUARY OR SO.
THE IDEA IS THAT WE WANT PEOPLE
TO BE FOCUSED ON KIND OF WHERE
THE PROJECT IS KIND
OF SEGMENTED AND BROKEN UP WITH
HARD TO FIGURE OUT A WAY TO
MESSAGE IN A WAY THAT MADE
SENSE.
SO WHAT WE DECIDED IS LET'S
TALK ABOUT THE UNDERGROUND
INFRASTRUCTURE AS PART OF ONE
ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY AND THEN
TALK ABOUT THE ON STREET
INFRASTRUCTURE IN PARTICULAR
THE BICYCLE FACILITIES THROUGH
A SEPARATE ENGAGEMENT.
AND SO THAT'S WHY THINGS WERE
KIND OF SEPARATED THAT WAY.
BUT THE PROJECTS ARE GOING TO
MOVE FORWARD IN UNISON AND IN
THEORY THIS PROJECT IS
SCHEDULED FOR TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR ALL WE HAVE ALL INTENTION
TO ADVANCE THAT PROJECT NEXT
THE TWENTY TWENTY FOR STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT.
SO THIS IS A NEW ADDITION
TALKED ABOUT KIND OF THE AREAS
OF FOCUS WE TYPICALLY START
THESE PROJECTS IN APRIL OR MAY
AND SO THE AREAS OF INTEREST
ARE THE LAKEWOOD NEIGHBORHOOD.
THIS IS SOUTH OF JACKSON, WEST
OF NINETY FOUR AND THE AREA
THAT INCLUDES COLLINGWOOD AND
BIRDWOOD.
SO THIS IS THE AREA SOUTH
OF JACKSON, NORTH OF LIBERTY
AND EAST OF THE STADIUM.
YOU MAY RECALL FROM PAST
PRESENTATIONS THAT WE TEND TO
KIND OF CLUSTER IN CERTAIN
AREAS BECAUSE THIS HELPS WITH
MOBILIZATION, HELPS WITH SOME
OTHER COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
THESE SORT OF RESURFACING
PROJECTS AND SO THE FOCAL AREAS
AS I MENTIONED, NICK, WILL
PROBABLY GIVE A PRESENTATION ON
THIS IN FEBRUARY AND YOU'LL GET
A MORE COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
UPDATE STREET AND NORTH YOU
THIS WAS ANOTHER ONE OF THOSE
LITTLE DASH LINES AND ALL
OF HIS PRESENTATIONS ABOUT GAPS
KIND OF ONE OF THE REMAINING
GAPS ON STATE STREET BASED ON
SOME CONVERSATIONS WE'RE HAVING
WITH THE RIDE AND THE
UNIVERSITY AND OTHER
STAKEHOLDERS.
WE'RE TRYING TO BE VERY
THOUGHTFUL ABOUT HOW TO
ACCOMMODATE ALL THE USERS ON
THAT CORRIDOR AND SO WE'RE
LIKELY GOING TO POSTPONE
CONSTRUCTION ON THAT UNTIL
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND WE COME
UP WITH A DESIGN THAT WORKS FOR
UNDER MICRO MOBILITY.
ONE OF THE THINGS TO NOTE HERE
IS THAT I DON'T KNOW IF YOU SAW
ONE BUT THANKS TO TREVOR WE
WERE IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH SPIN
FOR QUITE SOME TIME SEEING IF
WE COULD AUGMENT THE CITY'S
GREEN FLEET BY ALLOWING CITY
EMPLOYEES TO USE SPIN FOR
INTOWN TRIPS.
AND SO WE HAVE LAUNCHED THAT
PROGRAM AND SO WE'VE SEEN SOME
INTEREST AMONG CITY EMPLOYEES
USING SPIN BOTH THE SCOOTERS,
THE BIKES TO GET AROUND TOWN
BOTH FOR WORK PURPOSES AND
NON-WORK PURPOSES.
AND SO THIS IS AGAIN JUST AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO AND OUR
OUR GREEN FLEET WITHIN THE CITY
JUST WOULD BE INTERNAL
COMBUSTION ENGINE TRIPS TO
ELECTRIC TRIPS.
>> AND THEN I ALSO WANT TO GIVE
A SHOUT OUT TO THE MEDIA ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT SPIN IS
LOOKING TO DO POSSIBLY PROCURE
A CHICAGO BIKE RIGHT NOW THE
WAY THEY SERVICE ALL OF THEIR
VEHICLES IS WITH LIKE A PANEL
VAN AND THEY'RE LOOKING TO ADD
A CHICAGO BIKE TO THEIR FLEET
SO THEY CAN GO AROUND, SWAP OUT
BATTERIES, SERVICE VEHICLES
WITH THAT E CARGO BIKE AND ONE
OF THE REQUESTS THAT THEY HAD
WAS THEIR DOWNTOWN CENTRAL
LOCATION WHERE THEY COULD PARK
THAT.
SO WE WORKED WITH THE DEA TO
IDENTIFY A SPOT ON AND PARKING
STRUCTURE.
SO AGAIN THANKS TO THE MEDIA
FOR BEING A GOOD PART
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS,
WE ARE KIND OF SLOWLY
IMPLEMENTING AS MANY ACCESSIBLE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS AS WE CAN.
IT IS A PRIORITY FOR US THAT
ANY TIME WE CATCH A SIGNAL WE
WILL TRY TO UPGRADE IT TO
INCORPORATE ACCESSIBLE
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS SO WHAT THAT
MEANS IS THIS IS WHEN THE
SIGNAL ITSELF THE PEDESTRIAN
BUTTON HAS AN AUDIBLE PING SO
THAT PEOPLE WITH VISUAL VISUAL
IMPAIRMENT CAN LOCATE THE
PUSHBUTTON AND THEN ONCE THE
PUSH BUTTON IS ACTIVATED IT
WILL ALSO GIVE AN AUDIBLE
INDICATION IN TERMS OF WHEN
IT'S SAFE TO CROSS THE STREET
AND WHICH DIRECTION.
SO FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO'VE USED
OUR RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING
BEACONS, THESE ALL ARE APPS
ENABLED ALREADY HEARD THE
BEEPING AND YOU'VE HEARD THAT
WHEN YOU PUSH THE BUTTON IT'S
THE YELLOW LIGHTS ARE FLASHING
WHICH INDICATION FOR US AT
SIGNALS THAT CAN BE A LITTLE
DIFFERENT.
IT TELLS YOU WHICH STREET TO
CROSS AND SO WE HAVE BEEN TOLD
TO JUST RECENTLY AT TURON AND
7TH AND THEN AT THE JACK IN
HERE ON IN DEXTRE WE'RE GOING
TO SPLIT AS WELL AS ELSWORTH
RESEARCH PART.
>> SO I GUESS THE THREE ONE
THING I WILL THE THE NEW SIGNAL
AT DEXTRE WELL ACTUALLY AT THE
RAVINA LEG OF THE CURRENT
DEXTRE SPLIT WE ARE HAVING SOME
DETECTION PROBLEMS THERE.
>> SO FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO HAVE
BEEN THROUGH THAT INTERSECTION,
WE'RE STILL WORKING THROUGH
SOME OF THE KIND OF SIGNAL
COORDINATION AND DETECTION
VIEWS.
BUT MY UNDERSTANDING IS THE
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL
WHICH IS GOOD FOR STREET LIGHTS
THAT WE'RE TRACKING.
SIX HUNDRED AND TEN STREET
LIGHTS SO FAR BY DETI FOR THIS
YEAR UNDER QUIT BUILD PROGRAM I
CAN QUICKLY WALK THROUGH A
REPORT THAT WAS APPENDED TO
THIS REPORT ABOUT SOME
IMPRESSIONS THAT WE'VE GOTTEN
FROM THE COMMUNITY ABOUT OUR
QUICK BUILD DEPLOYMENT FROM A
SUMMER BLAST.
TWO TOPICS ARE THE BIKE PARAL
PILOT PROGRAM.
I THINK YOU'VE HEARD US MENTION
IN THE PAST THAT WE'VE LAUNCHED
THAT.
SO THE IDEA HERE IS THAT FOR
ANYBODY IN THE COMMUNITY
WOULD
LIKE TO SEE PUBLIC PARKING IN
THE PUBLIC PUBLIC BIKE PARKING
IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY,
THEY CAN PUT IN A REQUEST
THROUGH THE ONLINE PERMITTING
SYSTEM ON STREAM THIS IS A NO
FEE PERMIT.
IT'S JUST A WAY FOR US TO KIND
OF ORGANIZE THE WORK AND
CHANNEL IT EFFECTIVELY.
SO FAR ALL THE REQUESTS HAVE
BEEN WITHIN THE DDA SO AGAIN WE
FOR THOSE ON TO THE DENHA AND
THEY'RE LOOKING AT INSTALLING
BUT WE DO HAVE A SERIES OF BIKE
TRACKS TOO THAT THE CITY'S
WILLING TO PUT OUT THE WHERE
THERE WAS ON STREET PARKING
BEFORE OTHER THINGS LIKE THAT.
SO AGAIN, SPREAD THE WORD AMONG
YOUR NETWORKS.
WE WANT TO KNOW WE NEED TO
SCALE IT OR NOT.
AND THEN THE LAST UPDATE I
WANTED TO PROVIDE WAS RELATED
TO SAFE STREETS AND ROADS FOR
ALL I'M SURE MANY OF YOU ARE
ANXIOUS TO HEAR ABOUT THIS.
UNFORTUNATELY WE ARE STILL IN
THE CONTRACT GRANT FINALIZATION
PROCESS.
SO THIS AWARD WAS MADE BACK IN
JANUARY AND HERE WE ARE STILL
NEGOTIATING WITH FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION ON A
CONTRACT.
IT HAS CHANGED A LOT, YOU KNOW
AND SOME SYMPATHY THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION THIS WAS
THE NEW PROGRAM AND THEY WERE
FIGURING OUT THE RULES AS THE
PROGRAM WAS WAS GOING ON.
SO THEY WERE YOU KNOW, THE OLD
ADAGE BUILDING THE PLANE WHILE
THEY WERE FLYING IT AND SO WHAT
THAT HAS LED TO IS A LOT
OF KIND OF REWRITES AND GOING
BACK AND FIGURING OUT IF WE'RE
USING THE RIGHT TEMPLATE AND A
NUMBER OF OTHER THINGS.
OUR SITUATION WAS PARTICULARLY
COMPLICATED BY THE FACT I THINK
YOU'VE CERTAINLY REPORT IN THE
PAST THAT WE APPLIED UNDER ONE
PROGRAM AND WE GOT AWARDED
UNDER A DIFFERENT PROGRAM AND
SO THAT REALLY COMPLICATED THE
GRANT CONTRACT AGREEMENT
PROCESS.
I THINK WHERE I KEEP JINXING IT
EVERY TIME I SAY I SHOULD STOP
SAYING IT BUT I THINK WE'RE IN
THE FINAL THROES OF GETTING
THIS DONE.
WE FORWARDED OUR FINAL VERSION
OF THE CONTRACT LAST WEEK AND
WE'RE JUST WAITING FOR BETTER
HIGHWAYS TO SIGN OFF ON IT AND
THEN WE'LL ROUTE IT FOR FINAL
SIGNATURE SO WE CAN BEGIN THE
WORK OF IN EARNEST IN JANUARY.
WE HAVE A FEW MOMENTS IF YOU'LL
INDULGE ME.
WHAT I'D LIKE TO DO IS JUST
QUICKLY GO OVER THE QUICK BUILD
SURVEY RESULTS.
SO THIS WAS COMPILED BY SUSANNE
AND TREVOR.
THIS IS AGAIN GOING OUT TRYING
TO KIND OF LEARN FROM THE
PLAYBOOK ABOUT REALLY TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT YOUR
IMPRESSIONS THERE ARE ABOUT
THESE FACILITIES AFTER THEY GO
IN AND LEARNING FROM THAT.
WE WANTED TO SEE WHAT THE
IMPRESSIONS WERE FOR A QUICK
BUILD SO AS A REMINDER WE HAD
QUICK BUILD ON MAPLE AND ANN
AND GLEN FULLER WASHINGTON S
AND ST. PACKARD AND LIBERTY AND
STADIUM AND SO WE JUST KIND
OF ASKED PEOPLE WHAT THEIR
EXPERIENCES WITH THIS WHAT
LOCATIONS HAVE THEY EXPERIENCED
AND IT'S A PRETTY BROAD SWATH
OF WHAT WE HEARD.
WE ASKED TO KIND OF WHAT
BROUGHT THEM TO THOSE
LOCATIONS, WHAT WERE THEY DOING
WHERE THEY COMMUTING, WAS IT
RECREATING OR OTHERS MOST OF IT
WAS RELATED TO ERRANDS AND
SHOPPING.
BUT YOU CAN SEE THERE WAS A
BROAD SECTION OF ALL KINDS
OF USE THE NEXUS HOW DID YOU
EXPERIENCE IT AND KNOW YOU CAN
PROBABLY QUICKLY SEE THESE
PERCENTAGES DON'T NECESSARILY
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT AND THAT'S
BECAUSE YOU CAN RESPOND
MULTIPLE WAYS YOU COULD HAVE
EXPERIENCED THAT AS A DRIVER
AND AS A CYCLIST OR A CYCLIST
AND AS THE PEDESTRIAN OR AS A
BUS RIDER.
SO YOU KNOW, AS YOU CAN SEE THE
MAJORITY OF PEOPLE EXPERIENCE
THE MAJORITY OF RESPONDENTS OR
EXPERIENCED DRIVERS AND THAT'S
KIND OF IMPORTANT TO PUT A
FOOTNOTE ON BECAUSE OF SOME
OF THE IMPRESSIONS THAT WE GOT
AND THE SUBSEQUENT QUESTION SO
THE FIRST QUESTION WAS ABOUT,
YOU KNOW, HOW DID IT IMPACT HOW
YOU TRAVELED?
DID YOU FEEL COMFORTABLE, DID
AFFECT YOUR TRAVEL TIME THAT
AFFECT THE SPEED OF OTHERS THAT
AFFECT THE BEHAVIOR OF OTHERS
AND LARGELY YOU'LL SEE THAT THE
IMPRESSIONS WERE EITHER
POSITIVE OR IMPARTIAL.
SO IN TERMS OF COMFORT
OF TRAVEL, NEARLY HALF OF THE
RESPONDENTS ACTUALLY JUST OVER
HALF THE RESPONDENTS SAID IT
IMPROVED THEIR COMFORT TRAVEL
TIME WAS PRETTY MUCH A MIXED
BAG.
THERE WAS A SMALL PERCENTAGE
THAT SAID IT IMPROVED THEIR
TRAVEL TIME JUST MAYBE 15 OR SO
PERCENT.
THERE WERE MAYBE TWENTY THREE
PERCENT TWENTY FIVE PERCENT OR
SO THAT SAID IT MADE TRAVEL
TIME WORSE BUT THE VAST
MAJORITY FELT IT DIDN'T AFFECT
THEM NEGATIVELY OR POSITIVELY
IN TERMS OF SPEED MISSION IS
WAS SHOWN OR SUGGESTED TO BE
IMPROVED.
SO THE MAJORITY OF RESPONDENTS
AT FORTY PERCENT SUGGESTED THAT
SPEED IMPROVED THE NEXT EDIT
DIDN'T MAKE MUCH OF A
DIFFERENCE OR DIDN'T AFFECT IT
AND MAYBE YOU JUST OVER TWENTY
PERCENT THOUGHT IT MADE IT AND
THEN BEHAVIOR MAJORITY SAID
OF RESPONDENTS SAID IT DID
IMPROVE BEHAVIORS OVERALL
IMPRESSIONS ABOUT THE QUICK
BUILD.
IT'S A MIXED BAG BUT WHAT'S
KIND OF INTERESTING DEPENDING
UPON HOW YOU WANT TO SLICE IT,
YOU KNOW, VERY SATISFIED AND
SATISFIED ACCOUNT FOR OVER
FIFTY PERCENT OF RESPONDENTS
THOSE THAT WERE FAIRLY
IMPARTIAL BRING THAT NUMBER UP
TO ALMOST TWO THIRDS.
SO THOSE THAT WERE DISSATISFIED
OR VERY DISSATISFIED REPRESENT
ABOUT ONE THIRD OF AND THEN I
WON'T GO THROUGH ALL OF THE
OTHER COMMENTS.
YOU CAN READ THOSE AT YOUR
LEISURE.
BUT WHAT WE DID IT'S JUST
THERE'S ALWAYS AN OPEN ENDED
QUESTION ABOUT THESE SURVEYS
AND WHAT WE DID IS WE JUST CUT
AND PASTED ALL THOSE OVER.
THERE'S EDITING, THERE'S NO
GROUPING, THERE'S NO
CLUSTERING.
IT'S EVERYTHING IS OUT THERE.
SO YOU CAN SEE SOME OF THE
REMARKS RESPOND VERY FAVORABLY
TO IT.
SOME OF THE REMARKS RESPOND
CURRENTLY NEGATIVELY TOWARD
THAT.
BUT WE ALWAYS LOOK THESE OVER
TO SEE WHAT SORT OF INSIGHTS WE
CAN GLEAN FROM THE COMMENTS
THAT WE RECEIVE THOSE THE
UPDATES AND WANTED TO PROVIDE
AND I'M HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN ANY
QUESTIONS YOU MIGHT HAVE GOOD
BYE.
I JUST HAVE A COMMENT ABOUT THE
SAGO CHURCH PROJECT THAT YOU
SHOW US HAVING WRAPPED UP AND I
JUST WANTED TO SAY THANK YOU TO
NICK AND RAYMOND AND CHRIS WALL
AND EVERYONE WHO WORKED ON IT.
IT'S AMAZING.
I'VE RIDDEN AND WALKED THE
WHOLE LENGTH OF IT AND IT'S
NICE TO FINALLY HAVE A COMPLETE
STREET THERE.
SO IT'S IT'S REALLY IT'S GREAT.
THANK YOU, FRANK
YOU SO WE'LL
MOVE NOW TO EDGE REPORTS.
SO ANY COMMISSIONERS WHO
SPECIFICALLY SERVE AS A LIAISON
TO ANOTHER BODY OR ORGANIZATION
ARE INVITED TO PROVIDE BRIEF
REPORTS AND UPDATES.
GO AHEAD.
I JUST WANT TO GIVE EVERYBODY A
HEADS UP.
WE DID APPROVE THE SC MARIOTTE
ON HURON AND 5TH LAST NIGHT A
PLANNING COMMISSION AND IT WAS
APPROVED WITH NINE PARKING
SPOTS FOR ONE HUNDRED THIRTY
EIGHT HOTEL ROOM.
AND SO THE IDEA IS THAT THIS
HOTEL CAN UTILIZE PUBLIC
PARKING STRUCTURES FOR PURPOSES
BUT MOSTLY KIND OF ACTING AS AN
URBAN HOTEL.
>> JUST WANTED TO GIVE YOU GUYS
A HEADS UP THERE ARE HOTEL
DEVELOPERS WILLING TO LITERALLY
HAVE ONLY NINE SPOTS WITH EACH
ORGANIZATION SO THAT THEY
THAT'S JUST WANT GIVE EVERYONE
A HEADS UP ALONG WITH ANY OTHER
LEADS AND REWARDS.
SO WE'LL MOVE TO COMMISSION.
REMEMBER COMMUNICATIONS.
SO AT THIS POINT ALL
COMMISSIONERS ARE INVITED TO
REPORT PROVIDE REPORTS IT
UPDATES GO AHEAD.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO COMMENT ON
THE TOPIC THAT WAS REMOVED FROM
THE AGENDA WHICH IS CRASH
REPORTS AND JUST LIKE TO SHARE
MY OPINION THAT MANY OF YOU I'M
SURE YOU'VE ALREADY HEARD THAT
I THINK THIS IS LOOKING AT
CRASHES IS ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT THINGS THAT WE CAN DO
AS AN ORGANIZATION AND AS AS
PEOPLE IN THE CITY STAFF AND
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
AND I FEEL LIKE THOSE CRASH
REPORTS OUR OUR REPORT CARD ON
HOW WELL WE'RE DOING ON JUNE
ZERO AND I THINK THAT THIS
NEEDS TO BE A BIG PART OF WHAT
WE DO AND WHAT WE FOCUS ON AND
I UNDERSTAND THAT WE CAN TALK
ABOUT IT TONIGHT AND WE SHOULD
TALK ABOUT IT IN A FUTURE
MEETING.
BUT SHOULD TALK ABOUT IT IN A
FUTURE MEETING.
BUT EVEN THEN I DON'T THINK
THAT 20 MINUTES IS LONG ENOUGH
TO GIVE THIS TOPIC THE WHAT IT
DESERVES.
FOR ONE THING, I WOULD SAY THAT
OUR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
PRIORITIES SHOULD BE FOCUSED
LARGELY ON THE OUTCOME
OF LOOKING AT THOSE CRASHES.
WHAT ARE WE GOING TO BE DOING
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE DON'T HAVE
SIMILAR CRASHES AT THOSE
LOCATIONS IN A SIMILAR PLACES
THROUGHOUT THE CITY THAT NEEDS
TO BE ONE OF THE INPUTS INTO
OUR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR WORK
PLAN.
SO I DON'T KNOW I GUESS I'D
LIKE TO HEAR OTHERS OPINIONS ON
THE RIGHT WAY TO DO THAT AND
THE RIGHT WAY TO MAKE THAT A
BIGGER PART OF OUR MONTH TO
MONTH WORK.
I DON'T KNOW IF IT NEEDS TO
HAVE A STANDING COMMITTEE OR
WHAT THE RIGHT WAY TO APPROACH
IT IS.
I'M INTERESTED TO HEAR OTHERS
OPINIONS ON THAT BUT I JUST
WOULD LIKE TO REITERATE AGAIN
THAT I SEE THIS AS A VERY
IMPORTANT PART OF WHAT WE
SHOULD BE DOING ON THIS ON THIS
COMMISSION.
THANK YOU
.
ANYONE ELSE AT THIS?
>> WELL, I THINK PETE'S
COMMENTS REALLY TRANSITIONED US
NICELY INTO THE NEXT SECTION
WHICH IS CALL FOR AGENDA ITEMS
.
SO AT THIS POINT WE CAN REVIEW
THE EXISTING WORK PLAN AND
PREVIOUSLY REQUESTED AGENDA
ITEMS POTENTIALLY ADD SOME
OF WHAT HE WAS SAYING TO THE I
THINK PETE, I THINK THAT'S A
POINT WELL TAKEN.
I THINK THE GOOD NEWS IS I WAS
A LITTLE WORRIED THIS MEETING
WAS SO FULL WITH SOME BIG
PRESENTATIONS THAT WE WEREN'T
GOING TO HAVE ENOUGH TIME TO
TALK ABOUT THE CRASH REPORTS
HOPEFULLY NEXT MONTH WE'LL HAVE
A LITTLE BIT MORE TIME TO DO
THAT WHICH AND POINT WELL TAKEN
IN TERMS OF 20 MINUTES MAYBE
NOT BEING ENOUGH SO SOME OF THE
OTHER THINGS WE ARE TRACKING
EITHER FOR NEXT MONTH OR THINGS
THAT MIGHT CARRY OVER INTO
JANUARY THE ANNUAL REPORT WE
PLAN TO BRING THE DRAFT TO YOU
IN DECEMBER AGAIN WE CAN'T
FINALIZE TILL THE END OF THE
YEAR TILL WE'VE GOTTEN THROUGH
ALL OF OUR MATERIAL BUT WE WANT
TO WANT YOU TO LOOK AT IT
AGAIN.
WE ARE LOOKING FOR A VOLUNTEER
AMONG THE COMMISSION FOR A
GUEST PASSAGE.
SO IF ANY OF YOU WOULD LIKE TO
DO THAT, PLEASE REACH OUT TO
AND MYSELF AND CHRIS AND THEN
THAT WAY WE CAN KIND OF WORK
WITH YOU IN TERMS OF WHAT IT
LOOKS LIKE.
WE'RE HAPPY TO HELP YOU WITH
THAT.
SO IT SHOULDN'T BE A HEAVY
LIFT.
YOU KNOW, I THINK MAKING
SOMEONE PASS ON WHAT WAS DONE
IN THE PAST MOLLY IS OBVIOUSLY
DONE IN THIS CHAIR.
SO IT IS SOMETHING THAT WE
ALWAYS LIKE TO SHINE A
SPOTLIGHT ON SOME COMMISSION
MEMBERS WILL REVISIT THE WORK
PLAN AGAIN.
WE TOUCHED ON THAT TODAY.
WE'LL TAKE YOUR SUGGESTIONS,
INCORPORATE THAT AND THAT WILL
HELP GUIDE OUR WORK FOR TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR.
WE'LL START THE DISCUSSION OUR
POLICY AGENDA.
SO AGAIN THIS IS THE SIGNAL
CITY COUNCIL ABOUT THE THINGS
IMPORTANT TO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION LEGISLATIVELY.
I ALSO HAVE A REQUEST FROM THE
RIDE ABOUT THE TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR MILLAGE SERVICE
IMPROVEMENT PLAN SO I SUSPECT
THAT WILL BE COMING AND THEN
THE CRASH REPORT IS THE
CARRYOVER ITEM AS WELL.
SO I KNOW THAT SOUNDS LIKE A
LOT BUT I THINK SOME OF THOSE
ITEMS WE CAN GET THROUGH
RELATIVELY QUICKLY AND THEN WE
CAN SPEND SOME TIME TALKING
ABOUT THE TREATMENT.
YEAH AND JUST SECONDLY, I DID
THE PASSAGE LAST YEAR AND IT
WAS NOT A LOT OF TIME AND VERY
NICE TO REFLECT ON WHAT WE'VE
DONE.
SO WITH THAT THE NEXT MEETING
WILL BE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,
DECEMBER 20TH.
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AT SEVEN
P.M. THIS WILL ALSO BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS WE WILL ADJOURN OUR
NOVEMBER 15TH TWENTY TWENTY
THREE MEETING ANY OBJECTIONS
SEEING NONE.
THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANKS EVERYBODY FOR BEARING
WITH ME.
SEE YOU NEXT MONTH EVERYBODY.
THANKS AGAIN.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU